# Read This First

This book has no introduction.
Yes, you read that right. Now, you might immediately ask yourself,
"Why doesn’t Jeff ’s book have an introduction? Did he forget to write
it? Is he beginning to slip after all these years?! Did the dog eat it?"
No, I didn’t forget to write an introduction to this book. And, no, I’m
not beginning to slip. At least I don’t think I am. And my dog didn’t
eat it (although my daughter’s guinea pig looks suspicious). It’s just
that I’ve long believed that authors spend too much time convincing
me I should read their book, and a great deal of that convincing lives
in the introduction. The meat of most books usually doesn’t start until
Chapter 3. And I’m sure it’s not only me who does this, but I usually
skip the introduction.
This book actually starts here.
And you’re not allowed to skip this because it really is the most im‐
portant part. In fact, if you only get two points from this book, I’ll be
happy. And those two points are right here in this chapter:
• The goal of using stories isn’t to write better stories.
• The goal of product development isn’t to make products.
Let me explain.

## The Telephone Game

I’m sure you remember when you were a kid and you played this weird
"telephone game" where you whispered something to somebody, who 
whispered it to someone else, and so on around the group, until the
last person reveals the totally garbled message and everyone laughs.
Today, my family still plays this game at home with my kids around
the dinner table. Note to parents: this is a good activity to occupy kids
bored with adult dinner conversation.
In the grown-up world, we’ve continued this game—only we don’t
whisper to each other. We write lengthy documents and create officiallooking presentations that we hand off to someone, who proceeds to
get something completely different out of it than we intended. And
that person uses that document to create more documents to give to
different people. However, unlike that game we played as kids, we don’t
all laugh at the end.
When people read written instructions, they interpret them different‐
ly. If you find that a little hard to believe (it’s in writing, after all!), then
let me show you a few examples of instructions gone very, very wrong.
This is the cover of Jen Yates’s book Cake Wrecks (Andrews McMeel
Publishing). (Thanks to Jen and John Yates for supplying these.) The
book sprang from her wildly entertaining website, cakewrecks.com.
Please don’t go there if you don’t have at least an hour to waste. The
site shows photos of oddly decorated cakes that defy explanation—but
Jen explains them in spite of that. Now, one of the recurring themes
in both the site and the book is misinterpreted requirements. But of
course she doesn’t refer to them as requirements because it’s such a
nerdy word. She calls them literals because the reader read and literally
interpreted what was written. Looking at the photos, I can imagine
someone listening to a customer and writing down what he wants,
then handing that to someone else who’ll decorate a cake.
Customer: Hello, I’d like to order a cake.
Employee: Sure, what would you like written on it?
Customer: Could you write "So long, Alicia" in purple?
Employee: Sure.
Customer: And put stars around it?
Employee: No problem. I’ve written this up, and will hand it to my
cake decorator right away. We’ll have it for you in the morning.
These are funny examples, and we can laugh about wasting twenty
bucks on a cake. But sometimes the stakes are much greater than that.
You’ve probably heard the story about the 1999 crash of a $125 million
NASA Mars Climate Orbiter.1 OK, maybe you haven’t. But here’s the
punch line. If any project is sunk up to its eyeballs in requirements and
written documentation, it’s a NASA project. However, despite all the
filing cabinets full of requirements and documentation, the orbiter
crashed because while NASA used the metric system for its measure‐
ments, members of the Lockheed Martin engineering team used the
old imperial measurement system to develop navigation commands
for the vehicle’s thrusters. While no one knows exactly where the or‐
biter ended up, some think it has found its happy place orbiting the
sun somewhere past Mars.
Ironically, we put stuff in writing to communicate more clearly and to
avoid risk of misunderstanding. But, way too often, the opposite is
true.

*Shared documents aren’t shared understanding.*

Stop for a minute and write that down. Write it on a sticky note and
put it in your pocket. Consider getting it tattooed somewhere on your
body so you can see it when you’re getting ready for work in the
morning. When you read it, it’ll help you remember the stories I’m
telling you now.
Shared understanding is when we both understand what the other
person is imagining and why. Obviously, there wasn’t shared under‐
standing between several cake decorators and the people who gave
them instructions in writing. And, at NASA, someone important
didn’t share understanding with others working on the guidance sys‐
tem. I’m sure if you’ve been involved in software development for a
while, you don’t have to reach back far in your memory to recall a
situation where two people believed they were in agreement on a fea‐
ture they wanted to add to the software, but later found out that the
way one imagined it was wildly different from the other.

## Building Shared Understanding Is Disruptively Simple

A former coworker of mine, Luke Barrett, first drew this cartoon to
describe this problem. I asked him where he first saw it, but he didn’t
remember. So someone out there isn’t getting the credit he or she de‐
serves. For years I saw Luke step through these four frames as slides
in a PowerPoint deck while I casually dismissed them as interesting
but obvious. Apparently I’ve got a thick head. It’s taken me many years
to understand how this cartoon illustrates the most important thing
about using stories in software development. The idea is that if I have an idea in my head and I describe it in writing,
when you read that document, you might quite possibly imagine
something different. We could even ask everyone, "Do you all agree
with what’s written there?" and we might all say, "Yes! Yes, we do."
However, if we get together and talk, you can tell me what you think
and I can ask questions. The talking goes better if we can externalize
our thinking by drawing pictures or organizing our ideas using index
cards or sticky notes. If we give each other time to explain our thoughts
with words and pictures, we build shared understanding. It’s at this
point, though, that we realize that we all understood things differently.
That sucks. But at least now we know.
It’s not that one person is right or wrong, but that we all see different
and important aspects. Through combining and refining our different
ideas, we end up with a common understanding that includes all our
best ideas. That’s why externalizing our ideas is so important. We can
redraw sketches or move sticky notes around, and the cool thing is
that we’re really moving ideas around. What we’re really doing is
evolving our shared understanding. That’s super-hard with just words
alone.
When we leave this conversation, we may still name the same feature
or enhancement, it’s just that now we actually mean the same thing.
We feel aligned and confident we’re moving forward together. That’s
the quality we’re managing to. And, sadly, it’s intangible. You can’t see
or touch "shared understanding," but you can feel it.

## Stop Trying to Write Perfect Documents

There are a great number of people who believe that there’s some ideal
way to document—that, when people read documents and come away
with different understandings, it’s either the reader’s fault or the docu‐
ment writer’s. In reality, it’s neither.
The answer is just to stop it.
Stop trying to write the perfect document.
Go ahead and write something, anything. Then use productive con‐
versations with words and pictures to build shared understanding.

*The real goal of using stories is shared understanding*

Stories in Agile development get their name from how they should be
used, not what you write down. If you’re using stories in development
and you’re not talking together using words and pictures, you’re doing
it wrong.
If your goal in reading this book is to learn to write better stories, you’ve
got the wrong goal.

## Good Documents Are Like Vacation Photos

If I show you one of my vacation photos, you might see my kids on a
beach and politely say, "That’s cute," but when I look at my vacation
photo, I remember a particular beach in Hawaii that we had to drive
more than an hour on a deeply rutted four-wheel-drive trail, and then
hike another half-hour over lava fields to get to. I remember my kids
whining, saying nothing could possibly be worth this, and me won‐
dering the same thing. But it was. We enjoyed a blissful day on an
incredible beach where very few people were, which is why we took
the trouble to get there. The turtles came up on the shore to bask on
the sand, which was the icing on the cake of this fabulous day.
Of course, if you look at the picture you won’t know all that because
you weren’t there. I remember all that because I was.
For better or worse, this is the way documents actually work.
If you participate in lots of discussions about what software to build,
and then create a document to make sense of it, you might share it
with someone else who was there. You might both agree it’s good. But
remember, your shared understanding is filling in details that aren’t
in the document. Another reader who wasn’t there won’t get the same
things from it that you will. Even if she says she gets it, don’t believe
Read This First | xxxv
her. Get together and use the document to tell a story the same way I
used my vacation photo to tell you my story.

## Document to Help Remember

I’ve heard people joke, "We’re using an Agile process because we’ve
stopped writing documents." It’s a joke for people who know, because
a story-driven process needs lots of documents to work. But those
documents don’t always look at all like traditional requirements
documents.
It takes talking and sketching and writing and working with sticky
notes or index cards. It’s pointing to documents we brought into the
conversation and marking them up with highlighter and scribbled
notes. It’s interactive and high energy. If you’re sitting at a conference
table while a single person types what you say into a story management
system, you’re probably doing it wrong.
When you’re telling stories, most anything can be used as a tool to
communicate. And as we tell these stories, and write lots of notes, and
draw lots of pictures, we need to keep them. We carry them around to
look at later, photograph, and retype into more documents.
But, remember, what’s most important isn’t what’s written down—it’s
what we remember when we read it. That’s the vacation photo factor.
Talk, sketch, write, use sticky notes and cards, and then photograph
your results. Even better, shoot a short video of you talking through
what’s on the board. You’ll remember lots of details in a remarkable
depth that you could never possibly document.

* To help remember, photograph and shoot short videos of the results of your conversations. *

## Talking About the Right Thing

There are lots of people who believe their job is collecting and com‐
municating requirements. But it’s not.

* The truth is, your job is to change the world. *

Yes, I said that to get your attention. And, yes, I know that sounds like
hyperbole. That’s because that phrase is usually associated with world
peace, eliminating poverty, or even more far-fetched goals like getting
politicians to agree with one another. But I’m serious. Every great idea
you turn into a product solution changes the world in some small, or
not-so-small, way for the people who use it. In fact, if it doesn’t, you’ve
failed.

## Now and Later

There’s a simple, change-the-world model that I personally use and
keep in my head all the time, and you need to keep it in your head too
while you’re having story conversation and building shared
understanding.
The model starts by looking at the world as it is now. When you look
at the world as it is now, you’re going to find people who are unhappy,
mad, confused, or frustrated. Now, the world’s a big place, so we’ll focus
mostly on the people who use the software we make, or the people we
hope will use it. When you take a look at what they’re doing—and the
tools they use and how they’re doing things—you’re going to come up
with ideas, and the ideas might be for:
• Entirely new products you can build
• Features to add to an existing product
• Enhancements to products that you’ve built
At some point in time, you’ll have to communicate details about your
ideas to some other people, and you might start to do some design and
specification. If you’re going to hand all this off to someone else, then
you might indeed call all these details your requirements. But it’s im‐
portant to remember that requirements are just another name for the
ideas we have that would help people.
Given those requirements, we go through some process that results in
a delivery, and out comes some software that actually lands in the
world, and it lands in the world later. And what we hope is true is that
those people who were initially unhappy, mad, frustrated, or confused
will become happy when that software lands. Now, they’re not happy
because they saw the pretty box it came in—software doesn’t usually
come in boxes these days anyway. They’re not happy because they read
the release notes, or downloaded the app to their mobile device.
They’re happy because when they use the software, or the website, or
the mobile app, or whatever you’ve built, they do things differently—
and that’s what makes them happy.
Now, the truth is that you can’t please everyone all of the time. Your
mother should have told you that. Some people will be happier than
others with whatever it is that you produce, and some might still be
unhappy no matter how hard you’ve worked and how amazing your
product might be.

## Software Isn’t the Point

Everything between the idea and the delivery is called output. It’s what
we build. People working in Agile software development will deliber‐
ately measure velocity of output and try to speed up their rate of out‐
put. As people are building software, they are, of course, concerned
about the cost of what they’re doing and the speed at which what they’re
doing gets done, as they should be.
But, while it’s necessary, the output isn’t the real point; it’s not the
output that we really wanted. It’s what comes after as a result of that.
It’s called outcome. Outcome is what happens when things come out
—that’s why it’s called that—and it’s difficult because we don’t get to
measure outcome until things do come out. And we don’t measure
outcome by the number of features delivered, or what people have the
capability to now do. We measure what people actually do differently
to reach their goals as a consequence of what you’ve built, and most
important, whether you’ve made their lives better.2
That’s it. You’ve changed the world.
You’ve put something in it that changes the way people can reach their
goals, and when they use it, the world is different for them.
If you remember, your goal isn’t to just build a new product or feature.
When you have conversations about that feature, you’ll talk about who
it’s for, what they do now, and how things will change for them later.
That positive change later is really why they’d want it.

* Good story conversations are about who and why, not just what. *

## OK, It’s Not Just About People

I care about people as much as the next guy, but truthfully, it’s not just
about making people happy. If you work for a company that pays you
and others, you’ve got to focus on what ultimately helps your organi‐
zation earn more, protect or expand its market, or operate more effi‐
ciently. Because, if your company isn’t healthy, then you won’t have the
resources (or the job) to help anyone.
So I’ve got to revise this model a bit. It actually starts by looking inside
your organization. There you’ll find even more people who aren’t
happy. And it’s usually because the business isn’t performing as well as
they’d hope. To fix this, they may have ideas to focus on specific cus‐
tomers or users and to make or improve the software products they’re
using. You see, it ultimately is about people, because:

* Your company can’t get what it wants unless your customers and users get something they want. *

The flow continues by choosing the people to focus on, the problems
to solve, and the ideas to turn into working software. And from there
—if the customers buy, and the users use it, and people are happy—
eventually the business that sponsored this development will see the
benefit it’s looking for. That’ll be reflected in things like increased rev‐
enue, lower operational costs, happier customers, or expanded market
share. This makes lots of people inside your company happy. It should
make you happy, too, since you’ve just helped your company stay
healthy while making real people’s lives better in the process. It’s a
win-win.
It’s that longer-term stuff that happens as a consequence of good out‐
comes that’s I’ll label impact. Outcomes are often something you can
observe right away after delivery. But impact takes longer.

## Build Less

There’s an uncomfortable truth about the software world, and I suspect
it’s true of lots of other places. But I know software. And what I know
is that:

* There’s always more to build than we have time or resources to build—always. *

One of the common misconceptions in software development is that
we’re trying to get more output faster. Because it would make sense
that if there was too much to do, doing it faster would help, right? But
if you get the game right, you will realize that your job is not to build
more—it’s to build less.

* Minimize output, and maximize outcome and impact. *

At the end of the day, your job is to minimize output, and maximize
outcome and impact. The trick is that you’ve got to pay close attention
to the people whose problems you’re trying to solve. These include the
people who will choose to buy the software to solve a problem in their
organizations, the choosers, as well as the people who use it, the users.
Sometimes they’re the same people. Sometimes they’re not.
Your business has lots of possible users and customers it could focus
on. Your businesses strategy should give you some guidance about
who to focus on to get the impact you want. I promise you that no
business has the resources to make everyone happy—it’s just not
possible.
Don’t get me wrong here. Building more software faster is always a
good idea. But it’s never the solution.

## More on the Dreaded "R" Word

For almost the entire first decade of my software career, which I spent
building software for brick-and-mortar retailers, I got away without
using the word requirements—at least, not much. It just wasn’t a rele‐
vant term for what I was doing. I had lots of different customers who
all had specific ideas about what would help them. I also knew I worked
for a company that had to make money by selling my product. In fact,
I’d spent long hours standing at trade shows helping my company sell
its product to a wide variety of customers. I knew at the end of the day
that I would have to continue to work with those customers after I
shipped the products my team and I developed, and so I diligently
worked to act in their best interest. This meant I couldn’t give everyone
everything they wanted, because they wanted different things. And my
company and team didn’t have infinite time, so I had to work hard to
figure out the least I could build to make people happy. That may sound
frustrating, but it’s actually the fun part.
As the company grew, we added more traditional software people. At
one point, the head of a different team came to me and said, "Jeff, I
need you to make these changes to the product you’re working on."
I said, "Great, no problem. Tell me who they’re for and what problems
this solves for them."
Her response? "They’re the requirements."
I replied, "I get it. Just tell me a bit about who they’re for, and how
they’re going to use this, and where it fits into the way they work."
She looked at me like I was stupid and said to me one last time with
an air of finality, "They’re requirements."
It was at that moment that I learned that the word requirements actually
means shut up.
For a great many people, that’s exactly what requirements do. They
stop conversations about people and the problems we’re solving. The
truth is, if you build a fraction of what’s required you can still make
people very happy.3
Remember: at the end of the day, your job isn’t to get the requirements
right—your job is to change the world.

## That’s All There Is to It
If you get nothing else from this book, remember these things:
• Stories aren’t a written form of requirements; telling stories
through collaboration with words and pictures is a mechanism
that builds shared understanding.
• Stories aren’t the requirements; they’re discussions about solving
problems for our organization, our customers, and our users that
lead to agreements on what to build.
• Your job isn’t to build more software faster: it’s to maximize the
outcome and impact you get from what you choose to build.

Stories as they’re intended are a completely different way of thinking
about the challenges we face working together to create software—and
lots of other things, for that matter. If you can work together effectively
and create things that solve problems, you will rule the world. Or at
least some small part of it inhabited by your products.
As you read this book, my hope is that you get back to the basics of
using stories. I hope you work together with others, telling stories
about your users and customers and how you can help them. I hope
you draw pictures, and build big sticky-note models. I hope you feel
engaged and creative. I hope you feel like you’re making a difference.
Because when you do it right, you are. And it’s a lot more fun, too.
Now it’s time to talk about the most fun you can possibly have telling
stories, and that’s when you’re using a story map.