# The Big Picture


## Introduction

"I love Agile development! Every few weeks we see more working
software. But it feels like I’ve lost the big picture."
If I had a dime for every time I heard something like that from an Agile
team member, I’d have…well…a lot of dimes. I hear it a lot. You may
have even said something like that yourself. Well, I’ve got good news
for you. Using an Agile process and a story-driven approach doesn’t
mean you have to sacrifice the big picture. You can still have healthy
discussions about your whole product and still see progress every few
weeks.
Since you’ve patiently read the "Read This First" chapter, I’m going to
bypass all the junk about stories and proceed directly to how story
maps solve one of the biggest problems in Agile development. If you’re
already familiar with writing stories on Agile projects, this chapter
may be enough to get you started.

## The "A" Word

If you’re reading this book, you likely know that story mapping is a
way to work with user stories as they’re used in Agile processes. Now,
it’s at this point that every other book that has something to do with
Agile development reproduces the "Manifesto for Agile Software De‐
velopment," that thing written in 2001 by 17 guys who were frustrated
with some of the big counterproductive process trends going on at the
time. I’m glad they wrote it. And I’m glad that the impact of their work
has been felt by so many.
But I’m sorry to disappoint you—I’m not going to reprint the mani‐
festo and gush about why it matters. I believe you already know why
it does. And, if you haven’t read the manifesto, then you should.
In the space that the manifesto would have taken up in this chapter, I
am instead including a funny kitten photo.1
 Why? Because it has been
proven time and time again that funny kitten photos on the Internet
get far more attention than any manifesto could ever hope to.
So, you might wonder, what does this kitten have to do with Agile?
Actually, nothing. But Agile definitely has something to do with this
book, and with stories and the evolution of story mapping.
<Cue the flashback music…>
I was working at a startup in San Francisco in 2000, and the company
had hired Kent Beck (the guy who created Extreme Programming and
first described the idea of stories) as a consultant to get the software
development process going. I’m rewinding way back, but the impor‐
tant thing is this story idea is an old one. If you’re just starting out with
using stories, you lost any early adopter status you could have had a
decade or so ago. Kent and others who pioneered Extreme Program‐
ming knew that all those ways of doing requirements in the past didn’t
work out well. Kent’s simple idea was that we should get together and
tell our stories; that by talking we could build shared understanding,
and together we’d arrive at better solutions.

## Telling Stories, Not Writing Stories

When I first heard the term story, it bugged me. I’ll admit it. The idea
that we’d trivialize the important things that people wanted by calling
them stories didn’t seem right. But I’m a slow learner—a point I
brought up earlier when discussing shared understanding. It took me
a while to really get that:

* Stories get their name from how they should be used, not what should be written. *

Even before I’d really understood why stories had that name, I realized
that I could write down a bunch of stories—a sentence or a short title
—on sticky notes or cards. I could move them around and prioritize
them to decide which one was more important. Once I decided that
one was more important than another, then we could start having a
discussion about it. This was super-cool. Why hadn’t I ever written
things on cards and organized them this way before?
The problem was that this one card could be something that might
take a software developer just a couple hours to add to a product, or
maybe a couple days or a couple weeks, or maybe a month—who
knew? I didn’t—at least not until we started talking about it.
I got into a nasty argument while working with stories on my very first
Agile project when I began a story conversation and learned that my
story was too big. I’d hoped to get this story done in the next iteration.
The developers I spoke with informed me otherwise. I felt like I’d done
something wrong. The developers identified a small part we could talk
about that could be accomplished in our next iteration. But I left frus‐
trated that we couldn’t talk about the big picture. I really wanted to
understand how much time the big thing I really needed would take.
I’d hoped this discussion would accomplish that, and it didn’t.

## Telling the Whole Story

In 2001 I left the team I was on and started doing things differently. I,
and my team, tried an approach to writing stories that focused on the
big picture. We worked to understand the product we were building
and to make tradeoffs together. We used that bunch of index cards
with story titles to organize our thoughts and break down that big
picture into the small parts we could build next. In 2004, I wrote my
first article about this idea. I didn’t coin the term story mapping, how‐
ever, until 2007.
It turns out that the name you give something matters. It was after
giving the practice a good name that I really saw it spread. I thought
it was a great invention at the time—that is, until I started running into
more people who were doing similar if not exactly the same things. I’d
discovered a pattern.
I first heard this definition of a pattern from my friend Linda Rising:
when you tell someone about a great idea and he says, "Yeah, we do
something like that, too." It’s not an invention, it’s a pattern.
Story mapping is a pattern. It’s what sensible people do to make sense
of a whole product or whole feature. It’s what they do to break down
large stories into smaller ones. Don’t feel bad if you didn’t arrive at it
on your own. You would have eventually. But reading this book will
save you weeks or months of frustration.

* Story maps are for breaking down big stories as you tell them. *

Today, company after company has adopted the idea of story mapping.
My friend Martina at SAP said in a message she sent in September
2013 that:
…at this point more than 120 USM [User Story Mapping] workshops
have officially been recorded. A lot of POs just simply love it! It is
simply a well-established approach at SAP.
Every week I hear from someone else from somewhere else telling me
how mapping stories helped solve a problem for them. These days, I
learn more from talking to others than I ever could on my own.
The original idea of stories was a simple one. It turned our focus away
from shared documents and toward shared understanding. A com‐
mon way to use stories is to build a list of them, prioritize them, and
begin talking about them and then turning them into software one at
a time. That sounds pretty reasonable when you hear about it. But it
can create some big problems.

## Gary and the Tragedy of the Flat Backlog

A few years ago I met Gary Levitt. Gary was a businessperson in the
process of launching a new web product. The web product is out there
right now, and it’s called Mad Mimi, which when Gary conceived of
his product, was short for music industry marketing interface.
2 Gary
is a musician who had his own band. He managed his band, helped
manage others, and was also a studio musician and created recordings
for clients.
The day I met Gary he had an order from the Oprah Winfrey show
for dozens of intros and outros, little bits of music that are used to go
out to and come in from commercials and things like that. Producers
of television shows buy those the way people laying out a newsletter
buy clip art, so it’s like audio clip art. Gary had an idea for a fairly big
application that would help musicians like him and people he knew to
collaborate with one another on projects like the one he was working
on, along with lots of other things a band manager and musician would
need to do to manage and promote his band.
Gary wanted to get the software built so he worked with somebody,
and that somebody was working in an Agile way. That person told
Gary to write down a list of all the things he wanted, prioritize the list,
and then they would talk about the highest-valued things—the most
important—and start building them one at a time. That list of things
is what Agile processes refer to as a backlog, and it seemed to make
sense to Gary to create the list and start with the most important things
first. So that’s what he did.
Gary created his backlog and the development team started building
things a bit at a time. In the meantime, Gary was hemorrhaging cash
as he continued to pay for each piece of software that was built. The
software was slowly taking shape, but Gary could tell it was going to
take a lot longer for it to match his vision and he was going to run out
of cash long before then.
I knew the person who was working with Gary. My friend knew Gary
was stressing out and wanted to help him. The somebody I knew asked
if I could have a conversation with Gary, to talk with him and help him
get his ideas organized. I contacted Gary and made arrangements to
meet him at his office in Manhattan.

## Talk and Doc

Gary and I started talking. And as he talked, I wrote cards with key
points from what he said. There’s a mantra that I like when I build
story maps. I’ll say "talk and doc" (short for the verb document), which
basically means don’t let your words vaporize. Write them down on
cards so you can refer back to them later. You’ll notice how pointing
to a few words on a card quickly helps everyone recall the conversation
about it. We can slide them around the table where we can reorganize
them. We start using useful words like this and that as we point to
cards. It saves lots of time. Helping Gary externalize his thoughts was
critical to getting shared understanding. It wasn’t a habit for him, so
it was easy for me to write the cards as he told the story.

* Talk and doc: write cards or sticky notes to externalize your thinking as you tell stories. *

We started by placing cards on a tabletop, but quickly ran out of space.
Gary was moving offices the day I visited with him, and much of the
furniture in the New York City loft where he was located was off the
floor. So we moved our growing map of cards onto the floor.

### [Think — Write — Explain — Place]

  When working with a team to build a story map, or having discussions
  about anything, create a simple visualization to support your discus‐
  sion. One of the things that goes wrong is lots of ideas vaporize—that
  is, we say them, and people nod as if they’ve heard. The ideas are not
  written down or referred to. Then, later in the conversation, the ideas
  come up again and unfortunately need to be re-explained because
  people didn’t really hear or forgot them.
  Get in the habit of writing down a little about your idea before ex‐
  plaining it.
  1. If you’re using cards or sticky notes, write down a few words
  about your idea immediately after thinking it.
  2. Explain your idea to others as you point to the sticky note or card.
  Use big gestures. Draw more pictures. Tell stories.
  3. Place the card or sticky into a shared workspace where everyone
  can see, point to, add to, and move it around. Hopefully, there
  will be lots of other ideas from you and others in this growing
  pile.
  I find that when I’m doing my best to listen to others, what they’re
  saying causes me to think of other ideas. I used to try to hold those
  ideas in my head and wait for a moment to inject them into the con‐
  versation, resorting to outright interruption if the time didn’t come
  soon enough. But then I realized I’d stopped listening to the person
  who was talking, as my limited brainpower was focused on recalling
  my great idea. Today, I simply scribble the idea on a sticky note and
  set it aside to wait for a better point in the conversation to inject it.
  Somehow writing it pops it out of my head so I can focus on what I’m
  hearing. And reading it from the sticky later helps me recall my idea
  and explain it. 

I wasn’t here to capture Gary’s requirements. And the first thing we
talked about wasn’t that list of features. We had to back up a bit and
start at the beginning.

## Frame Your Idea

Our first conversation focused on framing his product idea. We talked
about his business and what his goals were. Why are you building this?
Tell me about the benefits for you and for the people who will use this.
What problems does it solve for those people and for you? As you read
this you might detect I’ve got that now-and-later model in my head.
I’m trying to understand the outcomes Gary is looking for, not the
output he wants to build.
If I put two cards down, one above the other, then people assume that
the one above is more important. Without saying a word, if I simply
slide a card above another, I’ve indicated something about importance.
Try that with a list of goals. Purposely put them in the wrong order
and watch the person you’re working with reach out to adjust them. I
did this with Gary and his goals, and it helped him express what was
more important to him.

## Describe Your Customers and Users

Gary and I continued to talk and doc. The next conversation Gary and
I had was about the customers who would buy, and users who would
use, his piece of software. We listed the different types of users. We
talked about what benefits they would get, and asked why they would
use the product and what we thought they would do with it. What was
in it for them? We built a big pile of those. The cards naturally seemed
to fall with most important users higher in the pile. Funny how it works
out that way without an explicit decision.
Before we’d gone into any detail at all, I could already see that Gary’s
vision was big. One of the tough realities about software development
is that there’s always more to build than we have time and money for.
So the goal should never be to build it all. The goal is to minimize the
amount we build. So the first question I asked Gary was, "Of all these
different users and the things they want to do, if we were to focus on
thrilling just one of those users, who would it be?"
Gary chose one and we started to really tell stories.


### [Mad Mimi User Types]

These are the different types of users Gary described for Mad Mimi.
Just naming them and writing a little about what they want helped us
both see that there was a lot here. Even before discussing features,
we’d decided to defer creating software for some types of users.

## Tell Your Users' Stories

I next said, "OK, let’s imagine the future. Let’s assume for a minute this
product is live and let’s talk about a day in the life of someone who
uses it and start telling the story. First, they would do this, and then
this, and so on and so on." And we told the story in a flow from left to
right. Sometimes we backtracked and put things to the left of other
things, and because they were on cards, we could easily rearrange
them.
The other interesting thing that happens naturally when working with
cards is if I put one to the left and another to the right, without saying
a word I’ve indicated sequence. This is kind of magical for me—but
I’m easily entertained. I marvel at how much we can communicate
without saying a word.

* Reorganizing cards together allows you to communicate without saying a word. *

As we talk and doc, and as I write down our conversation, we’re build‐
ing something really important. No, it’s not that pile of cards on the
floor. The something that’s really important is shared understanding.
We’re getting on the same page. This is something Gary had never
done with anyone before about his product idea, at least not at this
level of detail. He’d never even given it this much thought himself. The
high points were in his head, sort of like the action scenes you’d see in
a movie preview.
Before now, Gary had done what he was asked to do. He’d written a
bunch of story titles, put them in a list, and talked about them one at
a time. The conversations were more about the details of what to build
and less about this big picture. And there were a lot of holes in Gary’s
big picture. You’ll find that no matter how clear you are about your
story, talking through it while you map will help you discover the holes
in your own thinking.

* Mapping your story helps you find holes in your thinking. *

As we dug deeper, we realized that the story also wasn’t just about one
user. Gary’s started with a band manager who wanted to promote his
band and the work he was doing to create the promotion and email it
to fans. Then we quickly had to talk about the fan of the band, and tell
her story about seeing the promotion and then making plans to see a
show.
Then, if we were promoting the band someplace, we’d need to tell the
story of the venue’s manager and the information he’d like to learn
about the promotion. By this time, our map was wide enough that we
bumped into the wall, so we had to continue the story in another layer
below the first. That’s why the map in the photograph has two layers.
During the story, sometimes Gary would get to a part where he was
excited and he’d start describing lots of details. One card above another
can indicate priority. But it can also mean decomposition, which is just
a fancy word for smaller details that are part of a bigger thing. As Gary
described the details, I’d record them on a card, and place them below
the big user step above. For instance, when Gary described creating
the flyer that band managers would use to promote their gigs, he was
extra passionate and had lots of details to discuss.
Gary lived in New York City, and when bands are composing flyers
he’s imagining all these really cool things he sees stuck on walls and
lampposts in New York. They might look like they were put together
with glue and tape and then photocopied, but some were really elegant
and artistic. After recording a handful of details, I said, "Let’s come
back and get to the details later. Let’s continue on and move this story
forward." It’s easy to get lost in the details, especially the ones you’re
passionate about. But, when we’re trying to get the big picture, it’s
important to get to the end of the story before catching all those details.
Another mantra I use when mapping, at least at this stage, is "think
mile wide, inch deep"—or for people in sane countries using the metric
system: "kilometer wide, centimeter deep." Get to the end of the story
before getting lost in the details.

* Focus on the breadth of the story before diving into the depth. *

Eventually we did get to the end of Gary’s story. The band manager
had successfully promoted a gig to thousands of fans who spread the
word, and the show was a wild success. The product vision so far was
clear in both our heads. I said, "Now let’s go back and fill in the details
and consider some of the alternatives."

### [Mimi’s Big Story]

If you read across the top of Gary’s map, you’ll see big activities like:
• Signing up
• Changing my service
• Viewing my band stats
• Working with my show calendar
• Working with my audience
• Publicizing a show
• Signing up for a band’s email list
• Viewing promotions online
There were lots of other big things at the top of the map, but that’s a
good subset to give you an idea of what you’d write on a card. Notice
how we can assume who does what. When Gary said, "Publicizing a
show," he knew he was talking about the band manager. When I said,
"signing up for the band’s email list," Gary knew I was talking about
the band’s fan. Those cards were close by and easy to point to during
our conversation.
"Publicizing a show" was a big thing. It broke down into these steps
arranged left to right underneath the "Publicizing the show" card.
• Start a show promotion.
• Review the promo flyer Mimi created for me.
• Customize the promo flyer.
• Preview the promo flyer I created.
Notice how what we wrote on every card are short verb phrases that
say what the specific type of user wants to do. Writing them this way
helped us tell the story: "the band manager would then publicize the
show. To do that he’d start a promotion, then review the flyer Mimi
created, then customize it, and then…" Notice how when you put "and
then" in between what’s written on each card, you get a nice story

## Explore Details and Options

After we’ve got the breadth of the story map in place, it starts thick‐
ening up. The cards we put at the top of each of the columns in the
map become big things, and then the details break down below
them. We stop at each step in the user’s story and ask:
• What are the specific things they’d do here?
• What are alternative things they could do?
• What would make it really cool?
• What about when things go wrong?

At the end of this we’d gone back and filled in a lot of details. The result
was that we had told the story about a day in the life of a band manager,
as well as the other people important to the band manager’s success:
fans and venue managers.

### [The Details]

  If you look inside a story step like "Customize the promo flyer," you’d
  see details like:
  • Upload an image
  • Attach an audio file
  • Embed a video
  • Add free text
  • Change the layout
  • Start with a promotion I’ve used before
  You can see that even these smaller steps will need a lot more discus‐
  sion to work out the details. But at least we could begin to name them
  all.
  Notice how what’s written on the cards are also those short verb
  phrases that help you tell stories. We can string this together with
  phrases like "or he might" like this: "to customize the flyer the band
  manager might upload an image, or he might attach an audio file or
  embed a video, or…" It’s pretty cool, really.


I asked Gary, "Now what? We have all these other users with other
things they want to do—do you want to talk about them? You can see
that if we keep talking we’ll need a bigger room. And, Gary, if you do
all this stuff, it will take a lot of money to build this product. We could
talk about the rest of this stuff, but if we built this much and you
launched your product and just did this, that looks like it’d be a valuable
product."
Gary agreed, and he said, "I’m going to stop there."
The sad part of this story is that I asked Gary, "You’ve been building a
lot of software so far, but how much of the software you’ve built is on
this map we’ve created?"
"Nearly none of it," Gary replied, "because when I built a list and pri‐
oritized things, I sort of assumed we needed to start somewhere else.
I was thinking about the whole big vision of this thing, the vision that
would have taken me years to reach, and now that we’ve had this dis‐
cussion I wouldn’t have started there at all."
Story mapping is all about having a good old-fashioned conversation
and then organizing it in the form of a map. The part that most people
look at is the map—that left-to-right shape with the steps people take
to tell a big story. The top to bottom is about the details. But the critical
parts that frame the product and give more context are often hung
above and around the map. They’re the product’s goals, and informa‐
tion about its customers and users. If you keep a map on the wall, you’ll
find it’s good idea to add user interface (UI) sketches and other notes
around the map.
In just a day working together, Gary and I built shared understanding
around the product he wanted to build. But there was a storm cloud
forming above our heads, and we knew it. Inside each of those cards
we wrote were lots of details and lots more discussions. And, for Gary,
all those details and all those discussions equated to money he would
need to spend to build software—money he didn’t have. He’d learned
one of the fundamental truths about software development: there’s
always more to build than you’ll have time for.
Now, there are a lot of other big assumptions Gary was making about
the people who’d use his product, and if they really wanted to, or really
could use it as he envisioned. But, right now, those things weren’t his
biggest concern. He needed to work harder to minimize his product
idea to something that was feasible first.
Gary’s story eventually has a very happy ending. But in the next chapter
I’ll tell the story of another organization that learned it had way too
much to build, and how it used a map to find a viable solution.

### [Artgility—Creativity in Art Meets Creativity in IT]

  Background
  The Learning Connexion (TLC) is an art college in Wellington, New
  Zealand, that teaches art and creativity. TLC’s programs are unique
  because they are based on "learning by doing"; that is, the practice is
  the theory. In conjunction with tutors, students develop briefs that
  connect with the ideas they choose to explore.
  TLC was a typical small-to-medium-size organization that had de‐
  veloped ad hoc IT systems to support the needs it had at the time.
  Student information was collected in five different places and was
  different in each! TLC needed some way to manage students that
  would work for it and the way it teaches, which is quite different from
  most educational establishments.
  TLC had no experience with IT projects. Each small application that
  had been built for it had been done by somebody’s-brother’s-friend’sflatmate’s-dog using simple technologies like Microsoft Excel and
  Access. The sole commercial application (used for statutory report‐
  ing) double-handled data from the other four sources.
  As a former student, I had kept in touch with the team and when they
  needed some help they contacted me. In 2009 I had been in IT for
  nine years and had wanted to do an Agile project for the last three,
  ever since I had heard about it. This was the right place, the right
  project, and the right time to do it!
  Project Phoenix
  The initial workshops were going to be two half-day sessions with key
  staff members. I was working with a large, diverse group, and my goal
  was to develop shared understanding. I started with an overview of
  how story mapping works and an overview of the big steps in the
  school’s student management process.
  Up until I showed them this picture (the backbone of the story map),
  the team members each had an idea of what they did, but, as Alice the
  sponsor said, it was probably the first time they all had a clear picture
  of their own business process and how all the steps interacted.
  From there we brainstormed what people wanted the system to do.
  The scope was massive, and the stories were many
  The beauty was that these were creative people and they were used to
  the "appreciative enquiry" method, so braindumping everything they
  could think of that the system needed to do was something they took
  to like a baker makes bread.
  The main headings (from the diagram) were Enquiries → Admissions
  → Enrollments → Classes → Complete work → Completion →
  Graduation.
  Using the story mapping guidelines, we then walked through each
  section to make sure that it made sense, and got the flow for a student
  through each step of the process. Several people had lights go on sud‐
  denly, as they realized where they fit into the overall process and why
  they had to do some of their activities, and others realized they were
  being left out of certain steps that would make a big difference to
  them. Stepping through the story map and my emphasis on having
  stories vertically—which happened together—showed places where
  they could work together better and steps that were doubled up. Until
  this point, the team had little view of what everyone else was doing,
  but they suddenly developed shared understanding of how the whole
  process worked and a common lexicon. In one example, Classes was
  renamed Delivery because not all students attend classes.
  When it came to prioritizing, it wouldn’t have worked to identify the
  must-haves, should-haves, and could-haves—it was either in or out.
  It was very simple: "we cannot go live without this" above the line,
  and everything else below it. After we’d walked through the Enquiries,
  the team got it and spent the remainder of the day doing the rest. I
  was able to step out of it! The staff took over and started adding sub‐
  headings to better describe that "these things all have to happen to‐
  gether, and then these things." So, by the end, they had created, as a
  group, a big picture of the steps a student follows to get from initial
  enquiry to graduation.
  What started out as two half-day sessions turned into three full days
  of workshops in which people came and went as the need arose (they
  had to teach classes, and so forth). The flexibility of the workplace
  meant that nearly all the staff came through the Phoenix room and
  had their two cents' worth. They found the process really useful to get
  the big picture and for everyone to have their wants included. It also
  identified where there were gaps and made it easy to sift out what was
  really vital. At the end of it, we had a clear picture of what was to be
  in the first cut of the software.