# Plan to Build Less

## Introduction

* There’s always more to build than you have people, time, or money for. Always. *

Speaking in absolutes like "always" and "never" always gets me in trou‐
ble. But with the statement above, I honestly can’t recall a situation
where it wasn’t true although I have no sciencey data to back this up.
No one has ever once come to me saying, "We were asked to add this
new feature, and happily we had lots more time than we needed."
But one of the coolest things about using a story map is that it gives
you and other collaborators a space to think through alternatives and
to find a way to get a great outcome in the time that you have.
Grab a cup of coffee and settle into your chair. It’s time for a story.
This story is about my friends at Globo.com, the largest media com‐
pany in Brazil. Globo.com owns television and radio stations, pro‐
duces made-for-TV movies and original programming, and publishes
newspapers. It is a media monster in Brazil, and the largest Portugueselanguage media company in the world.
Globo.com knows better than most organizations on the planet what
unmovable deadlines really are. For example, it produces a cool ver‐
sion of a fantasy football game that’s revised and improved every year
for World Cup soccer—the sport that most of the planet refers to as
football. If Globo.com is late with development of that game, it doesn’t
have the luxury of changing the release date. Why not? Because the
rest of the world won’t reschedule the World Cup. Globo.com will
produce features and content for the Olympics games that Brazil will
host in 2016, and I can guarantee you that it’ll get it done in time—it
has to. And it’ll produce features and content for the release of nu‐
merous new television programs and reality TV shows. None of these
things can be rescheduled if Globo.com is late. Globo.com must al‐
ways finish on time. And, since that’s the reality of its business, Glo‐
bo.com is good at it. That’s not because the company is faster than
everyone else—sure, it’s fast, but it’s not that fast. It’s because it’s smart
about doing less.


## Mapping Helps Big Groups Build Shared Understanding

That’s just a portion of a pretty big map built by leaders of eight teams
from three different groups at Globo.com working together. The teams
from Sports, News, and Entertainment built this together to think
through the work they needed to do to rebuild, revamp, and renovate
their underlying content management system. This is the system that
drives all those news websites, sports websites, soap opera websites,
features that help publicize and recruit people for reality TV shows,
and much, much more. This massive system needs to be able to handle
large quantities of video feeds, real-time scores and election results,
photographs, fast-breaking news stories, and much more. It has a lot
to do, and it needs to look good doing it.
When I arrived at the Globo.com offices the day they built this map,
the teams working together were about to fall into the flat backlog
trap. Individual teams had prepared their respective prioritized
backlogs. It was already clear there was a huge amount of work to do,
and each team depended on the other. For instance, to get a good news
site out would need not just the news team, but also all the other teams
that built the foundational components that let the news website use
photos, videos, real-time data, and lots of other things.
I sat down with them and reminded them of something they already
knew: "I understand that you’re different teams because you’re focus‐
ing on different areas, but it’s a major revision of one content man‐
agement system. You’ll have to release together. You can’t plan a release
until you can see it all together. You’ve got to visualize all these de‐
pendencies." They agreed and quickly went to work reorganizing their
individual backlogs into a map. Within a few hours they built a map
on the wall using sticky notes that told the story of their content man‐
agement system.
I wasn’t in the room while team members worked together to build
the map. But when I returned later in the day, I was amazed at how
quickly they’d built it. They were pleased with themselves, and had
every right to be. They’d made sense of several complex backlogs, or‐
ganizing them into one coherent product story. And now each team
could see where its work fit into the big picture.

* Map for a product release across multiple teams to visualize dependencies. *

### [Anatomy of a Big Map]

Globo’s map is good example of what a typical map looks like after
you’ve framed, mapped, and explored lots of details.
The Backbone Organizes the Map
At the top of the map is the backbone, which sometimes has a couple
of different levels. You might start with the basic flow of the story,
which is one level. But, when it gets really long, it’s useful to go up one
more level to summarize things further. Later, I’ll add some language
about what I like to put at each level, but I’m reminded of an old friend
of mine who told me to stop trying to come up with precise language.
"It’s just big things and little things," he’d tell me. And he’s right.
The whole thing kind of looks like you extracted the spine out of a
weird, Seussian animal. You’ve got this long backbone at the top with
lots of irregularly spaced vertebrae, and these long ribs of varying
length hanging down from it.

#### Map in Whole Deliverable Releases
This map was built by multiple teams at Globo. There are develop‐
ment teams responsible for video, and teams charged with the task of
building the stuff on the backend that editors use to create and manage
content. There are teams responsible for some of the underlying met‐
adata and associations between data—that semantic markup junk that
I can never quite grok. And there are people who handle the external
presentation and how good this stuff looks when users and/or con‐
sumers see it. And still more people are looking after specific features
relevant to news, sports, or entertainment.
Multiple teams had to work together on this map because, for this
major revision, no single team could release its part without the oth‐
ers. The teams built a single map because they needed to think
through the release holistically

#### Map in a Narrative Flow Across Many Users and Systems
The map started with people on the left, and the things they had to
do to set up basic widgets for the screens that held news stories, pic‐
tures, and videos. There were other types of people who then com‐
bined those onto pages for soap opera or news websites. Then there
were editors who added content to pages. This entire backbone tells
the story of how lots of different people at Globo.com construct and
manage content in its website.
When you read the backbone of the map from left to right, it tells a
story about all the people who use the system and what they do in
order to create and manage sites and content. The left-to-right order
is what I call a narrative flow, which is an academic way of saying the
order in which we’d tell the story. Of course, all these people are doing
everything all at once, and sometimes things don’t move in a perfect
order, but we know that. We just put them in an order that helps us
tell the story.
For this big system, that narrative flow has to cut through many dif‐
ferent users' and systems' stories. I like to place stickies or simple per‐
sona thumbnails above the backbone so I can see who we’re talking
about at particular times in the story. And it’s OK to anthropomorph‐
ize backend services or complex stuff the system does. My friends at
SAP create fictitious personas for their systems and use pictures of
R2D2 or C3PO from Star Wars.


## Mapping Helps You Spot Holes in Your Story

When I talk with people who have built story maps, they’ll tell me,
"Every time we do this we find holes. We find things that we thought
another team should be taking care of, but it didn’t know. We find the
necessary stuff in between the big important features that we’d forgot
to talk about." By mapping together, Globo.com found some of that.
After you’ve envisioned the whole product or feature, it’s easier to start
to play the "What-About" game. That’s where we start asking, "What
about when this goes wrong?" Or "What about these other users?" Play
What-About with any concern you have, and add stickies to the body
of the map for feature ideas you’ll need in order to address these things
in your software. In Chapter 1, Gary played What-About to consider
options and alternatives. When you do this with other teams, you’ll
find they’re terrific at spotting problems that might arise where dif‐
ferent systems connect to each other.
One of the criticisms people sometimes make about story mapping is
that every time they sit down and create story maps, they end up with
way too much. But it’s my belief that we’re just finding the stuff now
that would have bitten us later on, and that’s a good thing.
In the old-school approach to software development, when we’d find
that new stuff later on—after we’d already estimated delivery time and
committed to a delivery date—we’d call that new stuff scope creep. I
personally believe that scope doesn’t creep; understanding grows. And
what happens when people build one of these story maps is that they
find the holes in their understanding.

* Scope doesn’t creep; understanding grows. *

## There’s Always Too Much

When I left the content management teams at Globo.com, everything
was wonderful—understanding was rampant and the teams knew
what to do. However, when I came back to check in with them a couple
days later, they were struggling again because they realized that there
was so much work to be done, that it would likely take more than a
year to accomplish everything on the map. And, of course, as savvy
readers can appreciate, when software developers say it’s going to take
a year to get something done, they really mean two years. It’s not be‐
cause they’re incompetent, or that they are calendar-challenged, it’s
just that estimating the time to do something we’ve never done before
is something we suck at. And, by nature, we’re often optimistic
animals.
They said to me, "There’s way too much. We have a lot to do here and
it’s going to take a long time."
"Do you have to do it all?" I asked.
They, of course, replied, "Yes, because it’s all part of one, big content
management system."
"But projects don’t run that long around here," I replied. "I know your
CEO and he’s going to want to see results much faster—right?"
"Yes," they confirmed, "he wants to see something live in time for the
upcoming Brazilian election in a few months!"
"Do you need all of this to go live for the election?" I asked.
As soon as I asked the question, I could see light bulbs click on. Of
course they didn’t need everything. Up 'til now, they’d been focused on
identifying sequence and dependency assuming they’d need to build
everything. They did, but it was really a question of when. They shifted
their thinking to focus on outcomes.

* Focus on what you hope will happen outside the system to make decisions about what’s inside the system. *

Globo.com focused on Brazilian elections. The teams thought specif‐
ically about the great outcome of successfully impressing visitors, ad‐
vertisers, and Globo’s parent media company with newer, sexier styles
of interactive content throughout the election. If they did that, they’d
have a win.
This wasn’t their first time facing down an impossible delivery date.
They thought about it for a bit, and realized that they definitely needed
to go live with the news website, and potentially some other things that
supported it because that’s where visitors and others would go to
monitor Brazilian elections. Focusing on the news website meant pay‐
ing attention to innovative ways to show real-time election data and
breaking news stories faster. And, of course, there was a newer, up-todate visual design overlaying everything.

## Slice Out a Minimum Viable Product Release

The teams grabbed a roll of blue painter’s tape and stretched lines
across the map left to right to make horizontal slices. They then went
to work moving cards up and down, above and below the blue lines
to designate which things needed to be done in the first slice, and which
could be done later.

The thought process worked a bit like this: If we go live for the Brazilian
elections, a lot of people in Brazil will see this thing. It’s going to land
with a splash. It’s going to affect these websites of ours and we’ll look
good. Everything in this slice is what users will need to be able to do after
the software is released so they can make that splash.

* Focus on outcomes—what users need to do
and see when the system comes out—and slice
out releases that will get you those
outcomes. *

## Slice Out a Release Roadmap

The map contained innovative things that would improve all Glo‐
bo.com’s web properties. But it really was going to take a long time to
get all of it done. Hitting the market window that the elections created
would be too big an opportunity to miss. Focusing on that helped
Globo identify the first release.
The teams then went to work thinking about what kinds of web prop‐
erties and market events should anchor the next releases. They posted
sticky notes to the left of each slice with a few words describing their
intention for each release slice—their target outcomes. Then they
continued to move cards up and down into their correct slices
In the end, they had an incremental release strategy that let them tackle
all the work they needed to do to replace the whole content manage‐
ment system over time, and in such a way that they saw real benefit
with each release. If they read down the left edge of the map, they had
a list of named releases, each with specific target outcomes. This is a
release roadmap.
Notice how the list isn’t a bunch of features. It’s a list of real-world
benefits—because, remember, your job isn’t to build software, it’s to
change the world. The hard part is choosing which people you want
to change the world for, and how.

* Focusing on specific target outcomes is the
secret to prioritizing development work *

And the opposite is true as well; that is, if you don’t know what your
target outcomes are—the specific benefits you’re trying to get—then
prioritization is close to impossible.


## Don’t Prioritize Features—Prioritize Outcomes

Notice also how the Globo teams started with a big goal of replacing
their entire content management system. Replacing the content man‐
agement system is the output, the stuff they were going to deliver.
Doing that would result in lots of positive outcomes. The secret to
breaking down that really big chunk of output was to focus on a small‐
er, specific outcome.
Remember: behind outcomes are specific behavior changes for spe‐
cific people engaged in specific activities. By focusing on the upcoming
Brazilian elections, Globo chose to focus on the people who follow the
news, especially those looking for up-to-the-minute election details.
But, in placing its focus on those people, it left out soap opera lovers,
sports lovers, and lots of other types of users. Those other people would
have to be satisfied with the current site for a while longer. Remember,
you can’t please everyone all the time.


## This Is Magic—Really, It Is

I may be easily impressed, but slicing is one of the coolest things about
organizing software ideas into a story map.
Many times I, and the teams I’ve worked with, have placed all our ideas
about the perfect product into a map and been overwhelmed by the
amount of work we’d have if we created it all. It all seems important.
But then we step back and think about the specific people who will use
our product, and what they’ll need to accomplish to be successful. We
distill that into a sentence or two. Then we carve away everything we
don’t need, and we’re shocked at how small our viable solution really
is. It’s magic.
Gary from Chapter 1 went on to do something similar with his prod‐
uct. He eventually narrowed focus to the band manager, the fan, and
Mimi’s internal administrator—because you’ve got to keep the site
running. Gary chose to leave out venue managers and production
musicians. In the end, what he realized is that by focusing on just those
few people and the activity of promoting, he ended up with a great
email promotion platform. So, for those of you who are Mimi users
today, that’s the experience you know.
Externalizing our thinking in a big visible map makes all these steps
easier. It makes it possible for lots of people to collaborate to accom‐
plish it.

### [Finding a Smaller Viable Release]

FORUM Credit Union is one of the nation’s largest and most tech‐
nologically progressive credit unions. Although the company had a
competent and creative development culture, it approached SEP to
build a new online banking system that rivaled existing commercial
off-the-shelf (COTS) solutions. Its goals included adding capabilities
for its mobile banking, personal finance management, and text
banking.
SEP kicked off the engagement with a two-day, collaborative storymapping discovery session that included outcomes, personas, and
story mapping. The session helped facilitate a structured conversation
to prioritize a large set of feature ideas. The outcomes and personas
were not enough, however, to prioritize the stories. By the end of two
days, the story map covered nearly two walls in the 1,000+ squarefoot development area!
After the story map was constructed, SEP guided the FORUM stake‐
holders through a simple prioritization model:
Differentiator
A feature that set them apart from their competition
Spoiler
A feature that is moving in on someone else’s differentiator
Cost reducer
A feature that reduces the organization costs
Table stakes
A feature necessary to compete in the marketplace
SEP indicated each story’s category using different color sticky notes.
Interesting discussions emerged—in fact, some stakeholders' differ‐
entiators were another stakeholder’s table stakes. It was clear many of
these conversations were happening for the first time! The story map
with the prioritization model enabled conversations to happen that
had not happened before. It helped guide the team to come to a shared
understanding around priorities.
After labeling the stories, SEP used a voting system to help stake‐
holders converge the ideation and discussion into the most mean‐
ingful set of outcome-focused features. To everyone’s surprise, several
stories were deemed postpone-worthy or unnecessary. Rough calcu‐
lations revealed several hundred thousand dollars in savings before
one line of code was written.
When asked about using story mapping to kick off the project, Doug
True, FORUM’s CEO, said, "When we first kick-started this project
with a story mapping process including the use of personas, I was
skeptical. Specifically, I was concerned with the time invested to this
softer side of the project. On the second day it clicked and the wor‐
thiness of the time materialized. In fact, now, I couldn’t imagine pur‐
suing a project of this scope and member-facing impact without such
a process."

## Why We Argue So Much About MVP

There’s a term that’s been kicking around in the software development
industry for a long time: minimum viable product, or simply MVP.
Frank Robinson is credited with originally coining the term MVP, but
these days definitions from Eric Ries and Steve Blank dominate. In
spite of multiple smart people trying to define the term, everyone still
seems confused—including me. Every organization I run into that uses
that term means something slightly different. Even people in the same
organization and the same conversation often mean different things.
Like most words in the dictionary, it has multiple meanings. I’m going
to give you three definitions for the term: a bad one, and two good
ones.
Here’s the bad one:

* Minimum viable product is not the crappiest
product you could possibly release. *

And the MVP isn’t the product that your users could use, but only in
the simplest of circumstances, and only if they had a high threshold
for pain. I commonly see organizations rationalizing their bad product
decisions with the argument that someone could use the product,
when it’s clear to everyone involved that they probably wouldn’t choose
to.
If Globo.com had used this definition for slicing out its first release, it
would have had a negative outcome. No one would have been im‐
pressed. The brand would have been hurt, and the company would
have been worse off than if it had released nothing at all.
When we use the term viable when talking about a living organism, it
means that an organism can survive in the world on its own without
dying. And when we talk about software, we mean the same thing.

* The minimum viable product is the smallest
product release that successfully achieves its
desired outcomes. *

I like this definition best. Minimum is a subjective term. So be specific
about who it’s subjective to—because it’s not you. Be specific about
who your customers and users are, and what they need to accomplish.
What’s minimum to them? I promise you, it’ll help the conversation
hugely. It’s still a tough conversation. But the alternative is the "HiPPO"
method—the "highest paid person’s opinion." That one sucks worse.

The term I prefer these days is minimum viable solution. Most of the
things I work with organizations on aren’t whole, new products.
They’re new features or capabilities, or improvements on features al‐
ready out there. So the term solution seems to make more sense. So let
me revise my definition:

* The minimum viable solution is the smallest
solution release that successfully achieves its
desired outcomes. *

Here comes the hard part…
We’re just guessing.
When we slice out a bunch of software functionality and call it a min‐
imum viable solution, we don’t really know if it is.
The problem with outcomes is that you can’t really observe them until
things come out. When you slice out a release, you’re forced to hy‐
pothesize what will happen. You might have to guess about what cus‐
tomers will buy your product, what users will choose to use it, if they
can use it, and what’s feasible to build in the time you have. You’re
forced to guess at how much will make them happy. That’s a lot of
guessing.
This sucks, because if you guess too low, well, that’s less than minimal,
and you’ve failed. If you guess too high, which many people do to hedge
their bets, then you’ve spent too much money and often risk not getting
things done at all. And worst of all, you could be just dead wrong, and
no amount of what you ship will matter at all.
It’s no wonder that the "crappiest product you could possibly release"
definition still thrives. Because that’s the one we don’t need to guess
about.

## The New MVP Isn’t a Product at All!

I know that some of you may have been feeling progressively twitchy
over the last couple of chapters. You may have thought to yourself,
Jeff’s overlooking the most important thing of all! And you might be
right. Some of the most important things you can discuss during story
and story map conversations are:
• What are our biggest, riskiest assumptions? Where is the
uncertainty?
• What could I do to learn something that would replace risks or
assumptions with real information?
This leads me to my third definition of MVP, as popularized by Eric
Ries in his book The Lean Startup (Crown Business). Eric learned the
hard way, as most of us do, that we’re just guessing. Eric worked for a
company that released a product that it thought was viable, but it was
wrong. Intelligently, he changed his strategy to focus on learning—to
focus on validating all those assumptions the company had made in
its first MVP release. Eric makes the important point that we need to
create smaller experiments, prototypes that test our hypothesis about
what’s minimal and viable. And if you adopt Eric’s way of thinking,
which you should, your first product should really be an experiment
—and the one after that, and the one after that, until you really prove
that you’ve got the right product.

* A minimal viable product is also the smallest
thing you could create or do to prove or dis‐
prove an assumption. *

While it was pretty cool that the folks at Globo.com were able to create
a plan to build less, they weren’t fooling themselves. They knew there
was lots left to learn to prove their assumptions were good. From here
they and everyone else need to create a plan to learn more. And that’s
where we’ll pick up our story in the next chapter.