# Plan to Finish on Time

# Introduction

This is Aaron and Mike. They work for a company called Workiva.
Workiva makes a suite of products on a platform called Wdesk. It solves
big problems for large companies, and it’s one of the biggest softwareas-a-service companies you’ve likely never heard of.
Aaron and Mike look happy, don’t they? But that’s typical for people
who’ve worked together to solve tough problems. Or could it be be‐
cause the guy on the right has a beer in his hand? Nah, that’s not it. It’s
that feeling from having solved a tough problem that’s making them
happy. The beer is just a reward for solving the tough problem. If you
don’t get beer, or an equivalent reward, for solving tough problems
where you work, you should have a talk with someone about that.
Aaron and Mike have just completed several rounds of product dis‐
covery, and they’re confident they have something that should be built
and go into production.
For them, discovery started with framing the feature idea they were
working with to really understand who it was for and why they were
building it. Then they talked directly to customers to validate their
guesses about how they were working today and what the real prob‐
lems were. After that, they built simple prototypes. For Aaron and
Mike, they were able to build simple electronic prototypes in Axure
and test them with customers remotely—first to see if they valued the
solution, and then to be confident that it was usable. For the feature
they were working on, they didn’t feel like they needed to prototype
in working software to learn what they needed.
After multiple iterations with simple prototypes, they finally felt con‐
fident they had something worth building. That may sound like a lot
of work, but they did it all in about three days. Their last step was to
create a backlog and a plan for delivering the feature. That’s their plan
in the picture. It’s a good plan. And that’s why they’re happy.
It’s important to note that this map isn’t about a whole product, it’s just
about a feature they’re adding to an existing product. That’s why it’s
smaller than Gary’s in Chapter 1, or that of the Globo.com teams. I’m
telling you this because some people mistakenly believe they need to
map their whole product to make a small change, and they use that as
a reason not to map.

* Map only what you need to support your conversation. *

## Tell It to the Team

To build this new feature, these two guys will need to build shared
understanding with their team. Their team needs to be able to point
out problems and possibilities for improvement, and to estimate how
long it’s going to take. That’s what they built this final map for. They
used it to tell the feature’s story—step by step, from the user’s per‐
spective. Notice the printed screens injected into the map? They poin‐
ted at screens and highlighted details while walking through the map
so those listening could better envision the solution. The people at
Disney who walk through movies using a storyboard have nothing on
these guys.
When team members asked why the screen behaves as it does, they
had stories to tell about variations they’d tried, and how users behaved.
When the team asked detailed questions about exactly what happens
when data is entered, or information submitted, these guys had given
it thought and could answer. Or, when they didn’t know, they discussed
ideas with the team, and made notes on the prototypes or sticky notes
in the model. They even added a couple of sticky notes for details they
hadn’t thought of, but the team did. Aaron told me that the team spot‐
ted several technical dependencies that he and Mike would never have
found.

## The Secret to Good Estimation

Anyone who’s been in the software development game for any length
of time knows that one of the biggest challenges is estimating how long
development will actually take. I’m going to let you in on one of the
best-kept secrets of good estimation:

* The best estimates come from developers who really understand what they’re estimating. *

There are lots of methods that promise to give more accurate estimates.
I’m not going to cover any of those here. But I will tell you none of
them work if the people building the software don’t have shared un‐
derstanding with one another, and with those who envisioned it.
Building shared understanding shouldn’t be a well-kept secret about
estimation. So you should go tell someone else right now.

## Plan to Build Piece by Piece

The team at Workiva can’t really get away with building less at this
point. They can’t do what Globo.com did in Chapter 2 and cut things
away, because they’ve already validated that they need it all. When they
were prototyping, they were able to cut away a lot and validate that
their solution was still valuable to customers. But, when you look at
their map, it’s cut into three slices.
"Why would they care?" you might ask. A third of what the customers
want is sort of like delivering a third of a sports car. No one could drive
it. But Mike is the product owner. He doesn’t get to walk away after
he’s identified a good solution. His role changes now, and he’s a bit
more like a director in a movie. He’s got to be there as every scene is
shot. And he’s got to decide which scenes should be shot first, and
which scenes get shot last. He knows that in the end the entire movie
needs to come together and look like one coherent whole.
So Mike worked with his team to create a development plan. This is
what they did: they sliced their map into three, crosscutting slices.
The first slice cuts all the way through the functionality. Once they
build all those pieces, they can see the functionality working from end
to end. It wouldn’t work in all the situations it needs to, and if they
shipped to users this way, those users would howl. But Mike and his
team will be able to see the software running end to end. They’ll be
able to put real data in it to see how well it performs, and they could
apply some automated testing tools to it to see how well it scales. They
can learn a lot about the technical risks that might cause them trouble
later on. They can be more confident going forward that they will be
able to release on time. Or, at least they’ll spot the unforeseen chal‐
lenges that would slow them down. I call this first slice a functional
walking skeleton—a term I borrowed from Alistair Cockburn. I’ve
heard others call this a "steel thread" or a "tracer bullet."
They’ll layer on the second slice to build up the functionality—to get
it closer to releasable. Along the way, they’re likely to learn some things
they couldn’t predict. They may have overlooked some characteristics
this feature should have—finer points that weren’t explored in the
prototype. They may have found that the system just doesn’t perform
the way they expected and some extra work will need to be done to get
the speed they want out of it. These are the "predictably unpredicta‐
bles"—a concept closely related to Donald Rumsfeld’s "unknown un‐
knowns." Don’t pretend they don’t exist. You know they do.
Finally, they’ll layer on the third slice to refine the feature, to make it
as polished as it can be. They’ll also add in some of those unpredictable
things.

## Don’t Release Each Slice
Each of these slices isn’t a release to customers and users: it’s a mile‐
stone the team members will use to stop and take stock of where they
are. From a user and customer perspective it’s incomplete, so save
yourselves the embarrassment.
Mike and Aaron’s team estimated this feature to be about two months'
worth of work. Like Eric, they used two-week sprints, so it would take
them four sprints. I guess they could have made four slices, one for
each sprint, but they weren’t thinking of it that way. And you shouldn’t,
either. Think of these slices as three different buckets with different
learning goals for each. Decide which sprints or iterations they’ll go
into when the time comes.

## The Other Secret to Good Estimation

One thing that seems to be a secret, but really shouldn’t be, is that
estimates are…estimated. Hit the Web and find any list of oxymor‐
ons. I’m confident you’ll find this term there: accurate estimate. If we
knew exactly how long things would take, then we wouldn’t have called
it an estimate, would we?
But if you build little bits of software, one thing you can be pretty sure
of is how long they took to build. That’s called measurement, and that’s
quite a bit more accurate.

Ok, so here’s the other secret: the more frequently you measure, the
better you get at predicting. If you commute to work every day, I sus‐
pect you’re pretty good at predicting how long it’ll take. If I asked you
how long it’d take to get to a different address in roughly the same area,
I’ll bet you could predict how long commuting there would take within
plus or minus about 10 minutes. That’s the way estimation works.
By slicing large things into small things, we get more opportunities to
measure. Of course, there’s some subtlety to this, but as a general
principle, you’ll get better predictions if you’ve got more examples of
how long similar things have taken to build.
As a product owner, Mike is ultimately on the hook for getting this
feature released on time. He’s a good product owner, so he helps ev‐
eryone in his small team take some ownership of that goal too. He
treats these early estimates as his delivery budget.

## Manage Your Budget

Mike and Aaron worked together with developers they trust early on
to get an initial time estimate. They treat it as a budget. And they ac‐
tively manage it.
With every small piece the team builds, they can measure how long
that piece took to build. They treat what they’ve built as spending
against their budget. They may find that they’re halfway through their
budgeted time, but only a third of the way through building the feature.
Certainly they didn’t expect that, but now they’re aware and they can
do something about it. They could borrow some budget from other
features they’re working on. Or there may be small changes they could
make to the feature that won’t substantially change the benefit users
get. Or they could just face the music and see what they can do to
change expectations with the people they’ve promised delivery to.
Depending on how bad it is, they may all need more beer.
When slicing out a development strategy, they’ll look to tackle the
things that may blow their budget as early as possible. Those are the
risky things. And it’s conversations with the whole team that help spot
them.

### [Exposing Risk in the Story Map]
  Chris Shinkle, SEP
  A large security company set out to build a mid-price-point, wireless,
  access control system for medium-size buildings (e.g., schools, doc‐
  tors' offices, retail, etc.). The company hired SEP to develop the firm‐
  ware within the locks as well as the wireless ZigBee gateway with
  which they communicated.
  The project was technically exciting, but had all the ingredients for
  failure, including skimpy budget, tight timeline, midstream leader‐
  ship changes, untested technology, and tons of scope bloat.
  Of course, things quickly began to unravel. The project team had
  missed several milestones. The client was unhappy and team morale
  was low. During a retrospective, the team discovered the biggest driv‐
  er for missing dates was unplanned work, mostly due to uncertainties
  and realized risks. Something needed to change.
  Like any group of smart engineers, the team tackled the problem head
  on. Their solution? Modify the story map.
  At a high level, they increased the frequency and fidelity of their story
  map. By increasing the frequency of story mapping at each interim
  release, they suspected they would increase the likelihood of identi‐
  fying more risks. By increasing the fidelity of the map to include "Risk
  Stories" (in addition to normal Activities, Tasks, and Details), they
  suspected they would be able to visualize, discuss, and better manage
  the risks.
  The results were astounding.
  The team knew that the width and depth of a typical story map gave
  a sense of the project size. They also knew the number of paths
  through the map was a good indicator of complexity. But, since un‐
  certainty and risk weren’t previously reflected in the story map, the
  map didn’t depict the actual amount of work (including learning) to
  be done.
  The new map, with Risk Stories, gave a better picture for the size and
  complexity of the road ahead. Project size and complexity were better
  represented, because they were composed of both the original known
  stories as well as the new "unknown stories"—the risks, or the knowl‐
  edge the team needed to gain to confidently move ahead with the
  known stories.
  As you’d expect, the story map became much more useful for plan‐
  ning. It now highlighted risks and uncertainties that would need time
  from the team. The ability to incorporate that time into planning
  made the team much more predictable and reliable.
  Side benefits included a tangible way to measure and update stake‐
  holders on learning. In conjunction with the traditional feature burndown chart, the team included a risk burn-down chart. It was partic‐
  ularly helpful for the customer to see the risk burn-down data when
  the feature burn-down didn’t look great.
  At the end of the day, the team learned that increasing the frequency
  of story map creation and adding new Risk Stories are powerful ways
  to make your maps better reflect reality.

### What Would da Vinci Do?

I often ask myself that. OK, I don’t really. But maybe I should.
What Mike and Aaron have done is to follow a strategy used by artists
to finish in time. It’s one I’ve used for years with software. And, when
I first met my friends at Globo.com, I found it’s one they use, because
as I mentioned before, if they’re late with cool, new interactive stuff
for the Olympics, the Olympic committee won’t reschedule the Olym‐
pics. I’ll guess this strategy is one you even use routinely, without
thinking.
Let me first explain what da Vinci doesn’t do. But, unfortunately, it’s
too often what people building software do try to do.
Suppose you were da Vinci, and you wanted to create a painting and
were working the way a naïve software team does.1 You might start
with what you believe is a clear vision of the painting in your mind.
Then you break up the painting into its parts. Let’s say you had five
days to paint this painting. Every day you’d paint more parts. At the
end of day five, huzzah!—you’re done! What could be simpler?
Only, it doesn’t work like that—at least not for artists. This way of
creating things assumes our vision is correct and accurate. It also as‐
sumes something about the skill of the creator and her ability to pre‐
cisely define parts without seeing them in context. If you do this in
software development, it’s called an incremental strategy. It’s the way
a bricklayer might build a wall. And it works if each piece is as regularly
sized and well defined as a brick.
When I used to draw as a kid, I fell into this trap. I’d often be drawing
some sort of animal and start with the head. I’d work on that 'til it was
perfect, then continue to draw the rest of the body—legs, tail, and so
on. By the time I got close to done, I could see that the proportions of
my animal had gotten a bit off. The head was too big, or too small for
the rest of the body. The legs seem to be twisted at an odd angle. And
the pose of the creature just seemed a bit stiff. At least, that was my
perspective as a talented six-year-old—and all six-year-olds are talen‐
ted artists.
It was later in life that I learned I’d benefit from sketching the whole
composition first. From there I could get proportions right, and make
changes to the pose of the creature. I’d maybe even reconsider what I
was going to draw.
I wasn’t there with da Vinci, but I expect he did something much the
same.
Even da Vinci would probably acknowledge that his vision wasn’t per‐
fect, and that he’d learn something as he was creating the painting. On
day one, I imagine he first sketched the composition, or maybe did a
light underpainting. I can imagine him at this point making changes
to the composition. "Hey, I think the smile is going to be an important
part. I’ll move her hand away from her mouth. And those mountains
in the background…too much."
By midweek, da Vinci is adding lots of color and form to the painting,
but he’s still making changes as he goes. By the end of the week, he
knows he’s running out of time, so all his effort shifts to refining the
painting. One wonders if the Mona Lisa missing her eyebrows was a
deliberate choice, or if da Vinci simply ran out of time to add a new,
fully refined feature.

* Great art is never finished, only abandoned.  — Leonardo da Vinci *

That quote is attributed to da Vinci, and it speaks to the notion that
we could continue to add and refine forever, but that, at some point,
we need to deliver the product. And, if da Vinci’s work and that of lots
of other artists are good examples, we—the people who appreciate the
work—have no idea it was abandoned. To us, it looks finished.

## Iterative AND Incremental

An artist or author works this way. In fact, the people who put together
the morning paper or evening news work this way. The people who
create live theater work this way. Anyone who must deliver on a dead‐
line, and learn as he goes, recognizes this strategy.

* Use iterative thinking to evaluate and make changes to what you’ve already made. * 

In software development, iterate has two meanings. From a process
perspective, it means to repeat the same process over and over. That’s
why the development time-box used in Agile development is often
called an iteration. But when you use this term to describe what you’re
doing with the software you build, it means to evaluate and change it.
And changing software after it’s built is too often seen as a failure. It’s
where terms like bad requirements or scope creep get used to repri‐
mand the people who made decisions about what to build. But we all
know that change is a necessary result of learning.

* Use incremental thinking to make additions. *

Unfortunately, we can easily get trapped in the whirling eddies of iter‐
ation. So we’ve got to keep our eye on the calendar and keep incre‐
mentally adding more. The artist adds more not only by adding whole
new things to a painting, but also by building up things that were
already added.
You might do the same things in software by first creating a simple
version of functionality without any extras. You might think of this as
your sketch. After using the simple version, you’d build it up by adding
more functionality to it. Over time, it builds up to be the finished
version you and others may have originally envisioned. If things go
really well, it builds up to something different than you originally en‐
visioned, but better because it benefits from what you’ve learned.

## Opening-, Mid-, and Endgame Strategy

This may hurt your head a bit, but I’m going to mix some metaphors
here. I personally rely on a strategy based on a chess metaphor when
creating software. I’m a crap chess player who barely knows how to
play the game, so if I’m misusing the metaphor, you’re not allowed to
write me and correct me. No matter how small the product or feature
release, I prefer to slice my release backlog into three groups:

Opening game
  Focus on the essential features or user steps that cross through the
  entire product. Focus on things that are technically challenging
  or risky. Skip the optional things users might do. Skip the sophis‐
  ticated business rules you know you’ll need before you can release.
  Build just enough to see the product working end-to-end.
Midgame
  Fill in and round out features. Add in stuff that supports optional
  steps users might take. Implement those tough business rules. If
  you’ve done your opening game stuff right, you’ll be able to start
  testing the product end-to-end for things like performance, scal‐
  ability, and usability. Those are all the quality concerns that are
  hard to bake in. We need to be aware of them, and constantly test
  them.
Endgame
  Refine your release. Make it sexier, and more efficient to use. Since
  you can use it now with real data and at scale, here’s where you’ll
  find improvement opportunities that were hard to see from a
  prototype. It’s here that you’ll have feedback from users you’ll be
  able to apply.

## Slice Out Your Development Strategy in a Map

If you’ve discovered what you believe is a viable first release to cus‐
tomers and users, work together as a team to slice that first public
release again into opening game, mid game, and endgame stories. The
team creating the product is best at identifying where the risks and
opportunities to learn are. They’ll feel the strongest ownership over
the plan they create together.
That’s what Aaron and Mike did with the help of their whole devel‐
opment team. Look again at how happy they are.

## It’s All About Risk

In Chapter 3, Eric had to deal with the risk of identifying the wrong
product. He used a strategy of slicing out releases that allowed him to
put whole products in front of customers.
In this chapter, Aaron and Mike are focused on technical risk, the
things that might blow their delivery schedule or cause the feature to
cost much more than they expected. They won’t show what they end
up with at the end of every cycle to customers and users because they
already know it’s not sufficient. But they’ll take a good, hard look at it
themselves and with their team, and use what they learn to safely steer
the development of this feature.
It’s subtle, but you might have caught in Chapter 2 that Eric was taking
two two-week sprints to build his next minimum viable product ex‐
periment. And he had to decide which things to build in the first sprint,
and which to build in the second sprint. He used this kind of thinking
to make those decisions. He and his team put the risky bits first—the
parts that Eric or his team wanted to see working sooner so that they
could course-correct before they put it in front of their customers.

## Now What?

You’ve seen four pretty good examples of building and using maps for
different purposes. There are a lot more ways to use maps that we’ll
explore in later chapters. But before you get too far, I want to show
you my favorite trick for teaching others how to map. I promise if you
try it, you’ll map like an expert from that moment on.
Let’s pick up there in Chapter 5. 