# You Already Know How

## Introduction 

If you think that creating a story map is complicated, or mystical, or
in any way hard to do, let me assure you right now that it’s not. In fact,
you’re already wired to understand all the basic concepts used to create
a map. Let’s work through an example right now, taken from everyday
life. And, to make it simple, we’ll use your life. Along the way I’ll give
some names to those important concepts you already understand.
Grab a pad of sticky notes and a pen, and follow along with me. Don’t
worry—take your time. I’ll wait.
Ready?

## 1. Write Out Your Story a Step at a Time

Close your eyes, and think back to the moment you woke up this
morning. You did wake up this morning, right? What’s the first thing
you recall doing? Now, open your eyes, and write it down on a sticky
note. I’ll write along with you. My first sticky note says, "Hit snooze."
Unfortunately, it usually does. On bad mornings I may have to hit it
two or three times.
Now, peel off that sticky and put it on the table in front of you. Then,
think of the next thing you did. Got it? Now, write it on the next sticky,
peel it off, and place it next to the first one. Then keep going. My next
couple of stickies say, "Turn off alarm" and "Stumble to the bathroom."
Keep writing sticky notes until you’ve gotten ready for work, or what‐
ever you’re doing today. I usually end with "Get into my car" to start
my drive for work. I expect it’ll take you three or four minutes to write
all your stickies.

### Tasks Are What We Do

Take a look at all the sticky notes you wrote. Notice how all of them
start with a verb? Well, almost all of them. These short verb phrases
like "Take a shower" and "Brush teeth" are tasks, which just means
something we do in order to reach a goal. When we describe the tasks
people using our software do in order to reach their goals, we’ll call
them user tasks. It’s the most important concept to building good story
maps—not to mention writing and telling good stories. You’ll find that
almost all the sticky notes in story maps about what people do using
your software use these short verb phrases.
Now stop here for a minute and think about how easy that was. I asked
you to write down what you did, and naturally out of your brain tasks
came out. I think it’s pretty cool that the most important concept is
the most natural.
Don’t get too hung up on that word task. If you’re a project manager,
you’ve noticed project plans are full of tasks. If you’ve been using sto‐
ries in Agile development, you know that planning work involves
writing a bunch of development and testing tasks. If you’re neither a
project manager nor a software developer, watch out when you use the
word task because those other people might think you mean the kind
of tasks they usually think about, and they’ll tell you you’re using it
wrong.

* User tasks are the basic building blocks of a story map. *

Now, count the number of tasks you wrote down.
Most people write somewhere between 15 and 25. If you wrote more,
that’s fabulous. If you wrote less, man, you’ve got a simple life. I wish
I could get ready in the morning that quickly. But you may want to
look back at your list and see if there’s anything you skipped writing
down.

### My Tasks Are Different Than Yours

I’m sure this doesn’t come as a surprise to you, but people are different
from one another. You’ll see these differences expressed in the way
they choose to do things.
For instance, some people have both the motivation and self-discipline
to exercise almost every morning. If you wrote a couple of tasks related
to exercise, you rock! I’m still working on that myself.
Some people simply have more responsibilities because of the house‐
hold they live in. If you’ve got kids, I promise you wrote down several
tasks that people without kids didn’t. If you have a dog, you may have
a task or two dedicated to taking care of the dog.
Keep that in mind when you’re thinking about people using your soft‐
ware. They may have different goals when using it. They may use it in
different contexts that force them to take into account other people or
things.

### I’m Just More Detail-Oriented

In this exercise, some people just write a lot more details than oth‐
ers. They might take something like "Make breakfast" and instead write
"Put bread in the toaster," "Pour a glass of juice," or, if you’re my wife,
"Add kale to the smoothie," which is one of the tasks I really hate her
doing.
Tasks are like rocks. If you take a big rock and hit it with a hammer,
it’ll break into a bunch of smaller ones. Those smaller rocks are still
rocks. It’s the same thing with tasks. Now I don’t know when a rock is
big enough to be called a boulder, or small enough to be called a pebble,
but there’s a cool way to tell a big task from a small task.
My friend Alistair Cockburn described the goal level concept in his
book Writing Effective Use Cases (Addison-Wesley Professional).
Don’t worry, we’re not going to start writing use cases. It’s just that the
concept is really useful when we’re talking about human behavior.
Alistair uses an altitude metaphor where sea level is in the middle, and
everything else is either above or below sea level. A sea-level task is
one we’d expect to complete before intentionally stopping to do some‐
thing else. Did you write "Take a shower" in your list of tasks? That’s a
sea-level task because you don’t get halfway through your shower and
think, Man, this shower is dragging on. I think I’ll grab a cup of coffee
and finish this shower later. Alistair calls these functional-level tasks
and annotates them with a little ocean wave. But I’ll just call them tasks.
Tasks like "Take a shower" break down into lots of smaller subtaskslike
"Adjust water temperature" and "Wash hair," and, if you’re my wife,
something involving an exfoliating loofah thing. Remember, people
are different, and you’ll see behavior differences in the way they ap‐
proach tasks. Alistair annotates these with a little fish because they’re
below the ocean.
Finally, we could roll up a bunch of tasks into a summary-level task.
Taking a shower, shaving, brushing teeth, and all that other stuff you
do in the morning after you get out of bed could roll up into a summary
task. I’m not sure what I’d call it, though. "Getting cleaned up?" "Morn‐
ing ablutions?" Ablutions is a silly word. Don’t use that.

* Use the goal-level concept to help you aggregate small tasks or decompose large tasks. *

## 2. Organize Your Story

If you haven’t done this already, organize your tasks in a left-to-right
flow with what you did first on the left, and what you did later on the
right.
Try telling a story by pointing at the first sticky note and saying, "First
I did this," and then pointing to the next sticky and saying, "then, I did
this." Now keep going moving from left to right and telling your story.
You can see that each sticky note is a step, and hidden in between each
sticky note is the nifty little conjunction phrase "…and then I…"
I’ll call this left-to-right order the narrative flow, which is a fancy way
of saying "storytelling order." We’ll call this whole thing a map and
that narrative flow is its left-to-right axis.
Wow, my flow got pretty wide. I started stacking things that happen
in and around the same time. As I lay out the flow, I see I already missed
a few details, and I’m trying to decide if they matter.

* Maps are organized left-to-right using a nar‐ rative flow: the order in which you’d tell the story. *

### Fill in Missing Details

The cool thing about this arrangement of sticky notes is that it allows
us to see the whole big story. Seeing the story organized in a narrative
flow allows you to more easily see the parts of the story that are missing.
Look back at your growing map and look for steps you might have
missed.
I added just a few more. There’s lots of details that are below sea level
that I’ve decided to not write down. If I did, there’d be hundreds of
stickies.

## 3. Explore Alternative Stories

So far this is dead obvious, right? Learning this was hardly worth the
paper you’re wasting. But wait, it’s about to get interesting.
Take a minute and think about what you did yesterday morning. If
there are different things you did yesterday morning than you did this
morning, write them down and add them to your map.
Think of mornings when things went wrong. What if there was no hot
water? What did you do then? What if you were out of milk or cereal
or whatever you normally eat for breakfast? What if your daughter
flew into a panic because she forgot to do her homework that’s due
today, which is what happens in my house every once in a while. Then
what? Write tasks for what you’d do and add them to the map.
Now, think about your ideal morning. What would make your morn‐
ing perfect? For me, it would be getting some exercise and enjoying a
long breakfast while I catch up on some reading. But then I’d have to
get up a lot earlier and stop hitting snooze.
Notice also that you’ll want to put some tasks in a column, both to save
space and because they seem similar to other tasks you might normally
do. For example, you might find that you’ve got tasks for making a
really great breakfast that you can put in a column along with the tasks
for making the quick breakfast you normally make.
My friend David Hussman calls this "playing What-About," a phrase
you might remember from Chapter 2 and Chapter 3. Unfortunately,
we could play What-About for a long time and make this map huge.
I added a few more things to my map specifically for things I wish I’d
done, like exercising or doing a bit of relaxing reading during break‐
fast. I also added a few more common alternatives that often happen
in the morning.

* Details, alternatives, variations, and exceptions fill in the body of a map. *

### Keep the Flow

Notice that when you start to add these new tasks, you’ll likely have to
reorganize your narrative flow. I know I did. For instance, I’d need to
slip that exercise thing in between getting up and taking a shower. And
I’d have to add in "Put on exercise clothes," which isn’t the same as the
"Get dressed" step after taking a shower.
If you relax and put things where it seems natural, you’ll find a nar‐
rative flow that feels right. When you tell your story now, you’ll find
that you can tell it a bunch of different ways. You can tell the typical
day story, the fabulous day story, and the story that has an emergency
or two—all by pointing at different stickies as you talk through it from
left to right. Try using some other conjunctions to glue your tasks
together. You might say, "I usually do this, but sometimes I do this" or
"I do this, or this, and then this." (I’m expecting you to fill in the word
this with what you actually do, because I can’t see what you’re pointing
at from here.)
When I was a kid, there was a popular series of children’s books called
Choose Your Own Adventure. Maybe you remember them. The idea
was that you’d read to the end of a section and then be given a couple
of choices about what the hero of the story would do next. After each
choice was a page number. Once you made your choice, you would
turn to that page and continue reading the story from there. Truthfully,
I was never a fan of those books. I always seemed to end up at the same
place no matter what choice I made; there never seemed to be enough
choices to make a really great adventure. The map works a little like
that, except better. The number of ways through a map is almost lim‐
itless—which, if you’re thinking about the way real people might use
a software product to meet their goals, is actually pretty accurate.
If you want to make things really challenging, do this exercise with a
couple of people you work with. You’ll learn more than you ever want‐
ed to know about the people you work with, and you’ll have a bit of
fun finding a narrative flow everyone agrees on. By "fun," I mean "ar‐
gument." There are always people who eat breakfast before showering,
and some who eat after. There’s the great tooth-brushing debate—do
you brush before or after breakfast, or both?
Relax.
If you’re arguing, it likely means that it doesn’t matter. For instance,
putting breakfast before or after taking a shower is a matter of
preference. Go with what’s most common for the group you’re working
with. You’ll find people won’t argue about things that do matter. For
example, putting "Get dressed" after "Take a shower" isn’t just a matter
of preference. Doing it the other way around results in showing up to
work wearing wet clothes.

## 4. Distill Your Map to Make a Backbone

By now, your map should be looking pretty wide, and if you’ve ex‐
plored lots of options, maybe a little deep. It’ll likely have 30 or more
tasks. It should look like the spine and ribs of a weird animal.
If you step back a bit and look across your map from left to right, you’ll
find there are bunches of stories that seem to go together—for in‐
stance, all those things you do in the bathroom to get ready, or all those
things in the kitchen to make breakfast, or that junk you do to check
the weather, grab a coat, and load your bag with your laptop or other
stuff you’ll need before leaving the house. Can you see those clusters
of tasks that seem to go together to help you reach a bigger goal?
Above each of these clusters of similar stickies, put a different colored
sticky note. Write a short verb phrase on it that distills all the tasks
underneath it.
If you don’t have a different color of sticky note, I’ll let you in on a
secret. Every package of sticky notes comes with two shapes! Rotate a
sticky note 45 degrees and, poof, you’ve got a cool diamond shape. Use
that if you want to make a sticky look different.
These sticky notes with a higher goal-level task are called activities.
Activities organize a bunch of tasks done by similar people at similar
times in order to reach a particular goal. When you read the activities
across the top of the map, they’re in a narrative flow, too. The row of
stickies is the backbone of the map. If you’ve got a map with lots of
stickies in it and you wanted to share it, a good way to start is by telling
a high-level story. Just read the backbone of the map, with the "…and
then they…" conjunction between each activity.

* Activities aggregate tasks directed at a common goal. *

Here’s my growing map with activities added to give the map a back‐
bone. It makes it easier to read and find things, at least for me. And it
makes it easier to really get the big picture of what’s going on in my
morning.

* Activities and high-level tasks form the back‐ bone of a story map. *

Activities don’t seem to have common language the way tasks do. For
instance, what do you call that thing you do before leaving the house?
That thing where you gather up your bag, find a shopping list, check
the weather, and grab an umbrella if you need it? I could call it "gath‐
ering up my junk." You might call it something different.
When you build these for your products and your customers, you’ll
want to call it what they call it.

## 5. Slice Out Tasks That Help You Reach a Specific Outcome

Now, here’s the really cool part—the part where you get to use the map
to help you imagine something that didn’t happen.
If you look at the map you’ve built, you’ll probably see "Hit snooze" or
"Turn off alarm" somewhere on the left edge. Imagine that this morn‐
ing you can skip that one. You can skip it because last night you forgot
to set your alarm. Your eyes shot open and looked at your clock and
you saw you needed to be somewhere in just a few minutes. You’re
really late! Don’t panic—we’re just pretending.
Write "Get out the door in a few minutes" on a sticky and place it to
the left of the map near the top. Now, imagine a line slicing through
the middle of the map left to right—kinda like a belt. Now, move all
the tasks below that line if you wouldn’t do them to reach the goal of
getting out in a few minutes. Don’t move the activities down, even if
there are no tasks left under them. Having the activity with no tasks
in it lets you show that you aren’t going to hit that goal this morning.
You’ll likely be left with just a few tasks in the top slice. Now go back
through the flow and fill in tasks that are missing and that you would
do if you were late. For example, you might normally take a shower,
but when you’re late you instead add in tasks like "Splash water on
face" or "Use a washcloth to wash the particularly stinky parts of my
body." When doing this activity with a group of developers, I often see
the task "Apply extra deodorant." I’m not judging. I’m just saying.
Here’s my map sliced to find the tasks I’ll need to get out the door in
a few minutes.
You can try this trick by thinking of different goals to hang on the left
side. Like "Have the most luxurious morning ever" or "Leave for a twoweek vacation." You’ll find the narrative flow stays pretty durable, but
that you’ll need to add or remove tasks to help you reach that different
goal.

* Use slices to identify all the tasks and details relevant to a specific outcome. *

## That’s It! You’ve Learned All the Important Concepts

That was really easy, wasn’t it? As you built this map you learned that:
• Tasks are short verb phrases that describe what people do.
• Tasks have different goal levels.
• Tasks in a map are arranged in a left-to-right narrative flow.
• The depth of a map contains variations and alternative tasks.
• Tasks are organized by activities across the top of the map.
• Activities form the backbone of the map.
• You can slice the map to identify the tasks you’ll need to reach a
specific outcome.

## Do Try This at Home, or at Work

Now, I’m pretty sure a great number of you were just reading along
and not really mapping as you read. Don’t think I didn’t notice. But if
you’re one of those slackers who didn’t map your morning, promise
me you will try it. It’s hands down my favorite way of teaching these
basic mapping concepts. If you’re trying out mapping for the first time
in your organization, get a small group of people together and run
through this exercise. You’ll all learn the basics. And you’ll be well on
your way to being able to map anything.

### [Do You Need to Shower Before Work?]

  Rick Cusick, Reading Plus, Winooski, Vermont
  We ran the morning map exercise with four developers, the product
  owner, a tester, a UX lead, and two of our product trainers. Split into
  two teams, we captured each person’s morning rapidly, and then sor‐
  ted and resorted our respective mornings into a single representation
  of what "an average morning" looked like. People enjoyed the work
  of building the map, even though they had never done it before or
  considered it in terms of building our own product’s experience.
  My goals in approaching the exercise were to promote the efficiency
  of visualizing our work, demonstrate how putting the map together
  created shared understanding, and leverage the value of seeing the
  experience in an accessible format. The unexpected benefits were the
  effects of close collaboration—working as a team on a project where
  the goal was revealed through the work itself—and the moments of
  empathy for one another. "I didn’t realize you dropped your kids off
  at school every day." "You do yoga in the morning before work?" "I
  can’t go without breakfast—I’ll be useless!"
  There was some confusion around events that happened simultane‐
  ously, or with causality. "If I read the paper while I’m drinking coffee,
  is that one or two sticky notes?" "On Fridays, my wife takes the kids
  to school, so how do I represent that?" The other challenge was a
  concern that the linear nature of time in a left-to-right story map
  wasn’t able to capture all possibilities. As the facilitator, I found it
  gratifying to see that kind of thinking in progress during the exercise,
  even if I didn’t have all the answers right then.
  As we prioritized activities, some hard choices were made to comic
  effect. "Do we need to shower before work?" is a funny if somewhat
  odiferous joke that popped out. "No matter what else we cut out, we
  have to wake up, get dressed, and drive to work," observed one par‐
  ticipant, with another quickly piping up, "Unless you are working
  from home!"
  Soon after this exercise, story maps became our preferred way to
  communicate an experience, prioritize user stories, and schedule
  iterations and releases. It had entered the company’s vernacular and
  the development culture, and continues through the present day.
  One lesson I learned, having run this same exercise now for multiple
  teams in our organization, is to use an icebreaker to prime the mindset
  of the participants. Start the session by having each person write just
  one thing he or she did between waking up and getting to work. Then
  ask each person to answer the question: "Why did you take that ac‐
  tion?" I found that this starts a background mental thread that shows
  up in later planning sessions: "What is the value of this user story?
  Why would our users do this?"

## It’s a Now Map, Not a Later Map

I suspect a few of you caught this, but the map you just created has a
fundamental difference from the maps created in the first four chap‐
ters. The maps Gary, Globo.com, Eric, and Mike and Aaron created
all imagine how users will use their products in the future—later, after
the product is delivered. They wrote tasks and activities that they
imagined people doing in the product. But the map you created is a
map about the way you do things now—this morning, as a matter of
fact. And, as it turns out, the concepts are the same in both. So be
relieved I haven’t wasted your time.
One of the cool things about "now story maps" is that you can build
them to better understand how people work today. You just did this
to learn how you got ready this morning. You can learn even more if
you go back and add other things to the map. The easy things to add
are:
Pains
  Things that don’t work, parts people hate
Joys or rewards
  The fun things, the things that make it worth doing
Questions
  Why do people do this? What’s going on when they do?
Ideas
  Things people could do, or that we could build that would take
away pain, or make the joys even better
Lots of people in the user experience community have been building
these for years to better understand their users. Sometimes they’re
called journey maps, but they’re the same basic idea.

## Try This for Real

In the early 2000s, I led a team at a small product company called
Tomax. We built software for brick-and-mortar retailers—those shop‐
ping places we used to go to before spending all our time online. We’d
taken on a new customer that ran a large chain of paint and interior
decoration stores. Now, we knew quite a bit about retail—and about
the users who sold things at point of sale and managed inventory—
but there were some things we didn’t know that were specific to paint
and decor stores. For instance, we didn’t know how to sell customtinted paint or custom blinds. And we had to learn fast.
To help us learn, we asked for the help of these three ladies. They’re
not software people. They’re interior decorators working for the com‐
pany that wanted our software. From them we learned the ins and outs
of selling custom blinds. So that we could learn quickly, we asked them
to think back to the last time they sold custom blinds. We asked them
to write down everything they did—from the moment a customer
contacted them, until the moment the blinds were installed and their
customer was happy. Now that should sound familiar, because we
asked them to do the same thing you just did to map your morning—
and it went pretty much the same way. They could name what they did
to sell custom blinds as easily as you could name what you did to get
ready in the morning. And, when we organized their tasks, we all
learned that there wasn’t any one way to do things, that they each did
things differently or in a different order. You’ll see the same thing if
you try the getting-up-in-the-morning map with a small group of dif‐
ferent people.
From this simple storytelling and mapping activity, we all built shared
understanding of how they worked now. It was from here that we could
begin to translate this map into the things they’d need to do in the
software we’d create later.

## With Software It’s Harder

I won’t lie to you. If you’re a software professional, it may take you a
while to stop talking about features and screens, and to start writing
short verb phrases that say what people are really trying to do. Keep
practicing. You’ll get it.
This will be really hard if you don’t know exactly who your user is,
what she’s trying to accomplish, or how she goes about it. Sadly, trying
to build a map in this situation will just point out what you don’t know.
If that’s where you are, then you’ll need to learn more about people
and what they do. Better yet, work with them directly to create a map.

### [Six Simple Steps to Story Mapping]

I can boil down the last four chapters into just six steps. You might be
thinking, Why didn’t he do that in the first place? But then I’d have
skipped telling you the stories, and just given you the requirements.
And that just doesn’t work.
While I know there are lots of right ways to build up and use a story
map, I have found that the following six-step process works well for
me:
1. Frame the problem. Who is it for, and why are we building it?
2. Map the big picture. Focus on breadth, not depth. Go a mile wide
and an inch deep (or a kilometer wide and a centimeter deep, for
my friends in the rest of the world). If you don’t have a clear
solution in mind, or even if you think you do, try mapping the
world as it is today, including pains and joys your users have.
3. Explore. Go deep and talk about other types of users and people,
how else they might do things, and the kinds of things that can
(and likely will) go wrong. For extra credit, sketch, prototype,
test, and refine solution ideas—changing and refining the map
as you go.
4. Slice out a release strategy. Remember: there’s always too much
to build. Focus on what you’re trying to achieve for your business,
and on the people your product will serve. Slice away what’s not
needed to reveal minimum solutions that both delight people and
help your organization reach its goals.
5. Slice out a learning strategy. You may have identified what you
think is a minimum viable solution, but remember that it’s a hy‐
pothesis until you prove otherwise. Use the map and discussion
to help you find your biggest risks. Slice the map into even smaller
minimum viable product experiments that you can place in front
of a subset of your users to learn what’s really valuable to them.
6. Slice out a development strategy. If you’ve sliced away everything
you don’t need to deliver, you’ll be left with what you do need.
Now slice your minimum viable solution into the parts you’d like
to build earlier and later. Focus on building things early that help
you learn to spot technical issues and development risks sooner.

## The Map Is Just the Beginning

Building a map helps you see the big picture, to see the forest for the
trees. That’s one of the biggest benefits of story mapping. But if you’re
the one responsible for building the forest, you’ll need to do it one tree
at a time. You’ve already learned the two most important things that
make stories work:
• Use storytelling with words and pictures to build shared
understanding.
• Don’t just talk about what to build: talk about who will use it and
why so you can minimize output and maximize outcome.
Keep these things in mind, and everything will fall into place as you
go forward.
It’s time we talked about some of the tactics for using stories "tree by
tree," because a lot can go wrong, and there are a few more things you
need to know to use stories well.

### [User Story Mapping at SAP—It’s All About Scaling]

Andrea Schmieden
When Jeff first presented his concept of user story mapping, it im‐
mediately made sense to us at SAP. It seemed to be a simple yet pow‐
erful method to turn a product vision into a backlog, and understand
what we were going to develop, for whom, and why. So we decided to
give it a try.
Yet, as we soon were to discover, what might be a simple thing for a
lone entrepreneur or an individual Scrum team is a completely dif‐
ferent beast for product development teams consisting of several
Scrum teams. At SAP, with its large development organization of
about 20,000 developers, large product development teams with de‐
pendencies on other teams are generally the norm, not the exception.
We needed to come up with a reliable way to scale user story mapping
for a large organization.

#### The Challenge

So, the challenge for us was two-fold:
• How can we map complex products without getting lost in
stickies?
• How can we popularize the method within the development or‐
ganization and enable people to use it?

#### 1. User Story Mapping for Large Products

To find answers to the first question, we decided it was best to run a
few pilot workshops with actual projects. We started out with a small
team of enthusiastic coaches and approximately 10 pilot projects, the
largest consisting of 14(!) Scrum teams. In this pilot phase, we varied
the method in several aspects, such as workshop formats, contents,
project phases, map formats, and more. After several feedback rounds
and iterations, we arrived at a set of good practices that for now seem
to work pretty well in our large-scale development context.

#### Key Good Practices

When a team first uses user story mapping, we recommend the in‐
volvement of an experienced coach. The coach sets up a meeting with
the requestor and discusses the workshop goals, whom to invite,
agenda, relevant inputs, and so forth. Typically, we do a facilitated
one-day workshop with the whole team and smaller follow-up ses‐
sions as required.
On the day of the workshop, we typically start with a product vision
exercise such as the well-known Elevator Pitch or the Cover Story1
format where the team describes what they would like to read about
their product in a trade journal article a year from now. This shows
whether the team has a common understanding about the general
direction, or whether they might need to invest in some additional
research (e.g., additional interviews, prototype testing, etc.).
The next step is to look at the typical users of the product. If the
workshop goal is to specify a detailed backlog, the user roles or per‐
sonas should result from the user research phase. If the project is in
an early phase, the team writes down their assumptions. These can
then be tested in user research phases. This has proven to be a good
way to prepare the user research. This is also an aspect where design
thinking practices and user story mapping work very well together.
We next use a three-tier approach to defining user stories: (1) start‐
ing with high-level usage steps, these are broken down into (2) finer
activities per user role, which in turn are broken down into (3) con‐
crete user stories in the format "as <role>, I want <functionality>, so
that <value>." These user stories add up to a first product backlog.
This three-tier approach is especially useful for bigger projects. On
each tier, the team can decide where it makes sense to drill down into
the details and where dependencies to other teams need to be con‐
sidered. This approach helps focus on the key development tasks at
hand while keeping the big picture in mind.
To make the map easier to grasp, we use color-coded stickies for ac‐
tivities and user stories related to an individual persona or role, as you
can see in the following graphic.
Often, while the team is creating the map, additional aspects come
up, such as "white spots" where the team needs to do more research,
or open questions, dependencies, or gaps. To highlight these issues,
we use stickies in different colors or different sizes. At first it might
seem awkward to put all these open issues on the map. However, in
our experience, this is one of the most useful aspects of the mapping
process: you get an honest and tangible impression of the things that
need further clarification. After the issues are on the table, it’s a lot
easier to tackle them.
When the team has reached a reasonable level of detail, we prioritize
the user stories in the backlog. Depending on the size of the project
and the project phase, this is sometimes done even on the activities
level rather than the user stories level. We typically use simple voting
techniques, such as dot voting. Sometimes, we use a simplified Kano
model for the voting, which means that the teams tag user stories as
"Must haves," "Delighters," or "Satisfiers." These simple voting results
are again a good basis for further alignment and validation with
stakeholders, end users, and customers.
As one of our product owners put it, "As a product owner, you often
have the challenge to fit lots of requirements into a very tight timeline.
We invited our customers to a one-day user story mapping workshop,
and it proved to be a very efficient and effective way to get to a com‐
mon understanding of their priorities."
Further details, detailed effort estimations, and so forth are usually
not part of the workshop, but rather are discussed in smaller groups
afterward.

#### 2. Scaling User Story Mapping

To scale and roll out this approach, the initial team of coaches pro‐
vided materials such as an Excel-based template for maps, templates
for personas, a standard workshop agenda, wiki articles, and method
description "cheat sheets." In addition, an internal tool for user story
mapping is being developed.
However, materials are one thing, and running a workshop is another.
So, again, we strongly recommend involving an experienced coach in
the process. To be able to provide enough coaches, the initial coaching
team trained more coaches. These "junior coaches" attended a work‐
shop with a senior coach, facilitated individual sessions, and then ran
workshops on their own. We also ran workshops and "train the train‐
er" sessions in SAP’s main development locations worldwide. To make
sure we learn from one another, and from the various experiences,
we implemented a global network call where coaches can share ques‐
tions and good practices backed up by wiki pages and communities
of practice. And, last but not least, we learned a lot from numerous
great exchanges with Jeff.
Our efforts at scaling user story mapping were successful. We ran
more than 200 facilitated workshops in various units and locations,
and now most teams are able to use user story mapping successfully
on their own.