# The Real Story About Stories

## Introduction

Story mapping is a remarkably simple idea. Using a simple map, you
can work with others to tell a product’s story and see the big picture
form as you do. Then, you carve up that big picture to make good
planning decisions. Underneath all that is the simple concept of Agile
stories.

## Kent’s Disruptively Simple Idea

The idea of stories originated with a very smart guy by the name of
Kent Beck. Kent was working with other people on software develop‐
ment in the late '90s, and he noticed that one of the biggest problems
in software development sprang from the traditional process approach
of using documents to describe precisely what we want—that is, the
requirements. By now you know the problem with that. Different
people can read the same document and imagine different things. They
can even "sign off " on the document believing they’re in agreement.

It’s later, when we get into the thick of developing software—or even
later than that, after it’s delivered—that we realize we weren’t thinking
of the same things. Lots of people call this lack of shared understanding
"bad requirements."
Let me vent a minute here. I have the pleasure of working with lots of
teams. And we often start work together by talking about their biggest
challenges. And, hands down, the one I hear most is "bad require‐
ments." And then everyone points at that document. The document
writer feels bad—as if he should have written more, or less, or used
some cool requirements technique. Those who signed off feel bad at
first, and then indignant. "Surely you didn’t expect I’d read every detail!
After all, we talked about this for days. I just expected you’d understood
what I said. I can’t understand your silly requirements document any‐
way." And the people building the software feel blindsided. They mud‐
dled their way through those cryptic documents and what they built
was still wrong. Everyone hates the document in the end. Yet we still
keep trying to write a better one.

* We can both read the same document, but have a different understanding of it. *

But misunderstanding the document is only half the problem. We
waste lots of time and money building what the document describes,
only to find out later that what actually solves the intended problem
is something very different. You heard me right. Those documents
often accurately describe the wrong thing. Documents usually de‐
scribe what we need, but not why we need it. If the person building
software could simply speak with someone who understood the users
who will be using the software and why they’ll be using it, there’s often
a more cost-effective way to delight those users. Without talking, we
just never know about it.

* The best solutions come from collaboration between the people with the problems to solve and the people who can solve them. *

Kent’s simple idea was to stop it—to stop working so hard on writing
the perfect document, and to get together to tell stories. Stories get their
name not from how they’re supposed to be written, but from how
they’re supposed to be used. Let me repeat that with more emotion.
Right now you should stop whatever you’re doing and say this out
loud:

* Stories get their name from how they’re sup‐ posed to be used, not from what you’re trying to write down. *

Kent’s idea was simple. If we get together and talk about the problem
we’re solving with software, who’ll use it, and why, then together we
can arrive at a solution, and build shared understanding along the way.

## Simple Isn’t Easy

A while back I began to notice that this entire story thing had gone a
bit sideways; that is, lots of the people writing books, teaching, and
using them focused on the activity of writing stories. If I had a dime
for every time I’ve been asked how to write good stories, I’d have even
more dimes than I collected a few chapters ago.
With all the focus on writing stories, I went back to Kent to make sure
I wasn’t missing something here. Over the course of an email conver‐
sation, Kent explained where the idea came from:
    What I was thinking of was the way users sometimes tell stories about
    the cool new things the software they use does. [For example,] if I
    type in the zip code and it automatically fills in the city and state
    without me having to touch a button.
    I think that was the example that triggered the idea. If you can tell
    stories about what the software does and generate interest and vision
    in the listener’s mind, then why not tell stories before the software
    does it?
    — Kent Beck via personal email, Aug 2010
So the idea is telling, and you know you’re doing it right if you’re gen‐
erating energy, interest, and vision in the listener’s mind. That’s big.
And it sounds a lot more fun than reading a typical requirements
document.1
But folks who start using stories for software development—and who
still have a traditional process model in their heads—tend to focus on
the writing part. I’ve seen teams replace their traditional requirements
process with story writing, and then get frustrated trying to write sto‐
ries to precisely communicate what should be built. If you’re doing
that now, stop it.

* If you’re not getting together to have rich discussions about your stories, then you’re not really using stories. *

## Ron Jeffries and the 3 Cs

In the book Extreme Programming Installed, Ron Jeffries et al.
(Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing) describe the story process
best:
Card
  Write what you’d like to see in the software on a bunch of index cards.
Conversation
  Get together and have a rich conversation about what software to build.
Confirmation
  Together agree on how you’ll confirm that the software is done.
If it sounds simple, it’s because it is. Just remember, simple isn’t easy.

### 1. Card

Imagine you’re responsible for working with a team to get some soft‐
ware built. Imagine that software as best you can. Then, for each thing
users want to do with the product, write a card. You’ll end up with a
bunch of them. Kent’s original idea was to write them on index cards
because it’s easy to organize a bunch of cards on a tabletop. It’s easier
to prioritize them, or organize them into a structure that helps you see
the big picture—a structure like a story map, of course.
The bunch of cards that describes the whole product, or all the changes
we’d like to make to a product we have, is called a product backlog.
That term originated with the Agile process Scrum. Someone I know
once said, "I hate that term backlog. We haven’t even started to build
software, and it already sounds like we’re behind!" I’m not sure I have
a better name for that bunch of stories, but if you can think of a good
one, please use it, and let me know what it is.

### 2. Conversation

The conversation might start with you describing what you’re think‐
ing, and the person listening might form an idea in her head based
upon what she heard. Because it’s hard to explain things perfectly, and
because it’s easy to imagine different things based on our past
experience, the listener likely imagined something different than you.
But that’s where the magic comes in.
Because this is a conversation, the listener can ask questions and it’s
the back and forth that will correct that understanding and help ev‐
eryone arrive at some shared understanding.
In a traditional software process, the goal for the person who had the
requirements is to get them written down correctly; and for the person
who’s going to build the software, it’s to understand them correctly.
Because this is a story-driven process, you each have a different shared
goal. Your goal is to work together to understand the problem being
solved by building software, and solve it as best you can. Eventually,
you’ll need to agree on what you should build that you both believe
will help the users of the product.
Let me say this again, because it’s an important point:

* Story conversations are about working together to arrive at a best solution to a problem we both understand. *

### 3. Confirmation

All this talking is cool, but we’ve eventually got to build some software
—right? So, when we feel like we’re converging on a good solution,
we’ll need to start focusing on the answer to these questions:
If we build what we agree to, what will we check to see that we’re
done?
  The answer to this question is usually a short list of things to
  check. This list is often called acceptance criteria, or story tests.
When it comes time to demonstrate this later at a product review,
how will we do that?
  The answer to this question often reveals some holes. For example,
  you could make the software work, but to demonstrate it you’ll
  need to get your hands on some realistic data. Discussing dem‐
  onstration may add a few more bullets to your list of acceptance
  criteria.

## Words and Pictures

The path to get to this agreement isn’t just a single card and lots of
hand waving. The conversation goes best if it includes lots of things
such as simple personas, workflow diagrams, UI sketches, and any
other traditional software model that’ll help explain things. That way,
you don’t have to just wave hands—you can point a lot, too. Whatever
we bring into the conversation we’ll mark up, write on, correct, and
change. We’ll even create a lot of things on the spot during that con‐
versation. Use a whiteboard or flipchart paper. And don’t forget to take
some "vacation photos" before you leave. Photos of what you’ve created
will help you recall all the details of the conversation that would be
difficult to write down.
Good story conversations have lots of words and pictures.
Keep the acceptance criteria you decide on big and visible during the
conversation. This team uses flipchart paper to record as they go.

## That’s It

That’s all there is. That’s Kent’s disruptively simple idea. And, if you do
it, I promise you it’ll change everything.
Unless it doesn’t.
For people used to working the old-fashioned way, this conversation
can go really badly. They fall back into their old patterns of the person
bringing in stuff, trying to work hard to communicate exactly what he
wants to the other person, and the other person working hard to try
to understand and then punch holes in what the other person is saying.
If this goes on too long, they often feel like punching holes in each
other, which is not conducive to getting things done.
There are some things to keep in mind to help these conversations go
better. Happily, that’s what the next chapter is about.
