# Telling Better Stories

## Introduction

The idea of stories is simple. Maybe too simple. For lots of people in
software development, conversations like these feel very foreign…and
a little uncomfortable. And people often revert to talking about re‐
quirements like they always used to.
When Kent Beck originally described the idea of stories, he didn’t call
them user stories, he just called them stories—because that’s what he
hoped you’d be telling. But very soon after the first books on Extreme
Programming were published, stories picked up the more descriptive
prefix user so that we’d remember to have conversations from the per‐
spective of the people outside the software. Changing the name wasn’t
enough, however.

## Connextra’s Cool Template

This is my friend Rachel Davies. And she’s holding a story card.
In the late 1990s she worked for a company called Connextra. Con‐
ntextra was one of the earliest adopters of Extreme Programming, the
Agile process where stories came from. When the Connextra folks
started using stories, they found they ran into some common prob‐
lems. Most of the people who wrote the stories at Connextra were from
sales and marketing. They tended to write down the feature they
needed. But, when it came time for developers to have conversations,
they needed to find that original stakeholder and get a good conver‐
sation started—one that included who and why. Just having the name
of the feature wasn’t helping the team find the right people to talk to,
or to start the right discussions. And, back then, there wasn’t much
guidance about what could or should be on a card. The template
evolved over time at Connextra. It wasn’t Rachel’s invention specifi‐
cally. Rather, it was the entire organization’s desire to build things that
mattered.
After using the template for a while, the folks at Connextra wanted to
show off their cool new trick. They printed a bunch of example cards
to show off at XPDay 2001, a small conference in London. That’s what
Rachel is holding. It’s her last card, and might very well be the last card
in existence, so that makes it a historical artifact.
The template goes like this:
  As a [type of user]
  I want to [do something]
  So that I can [get some benefit]
The folks at Connextra used this simple template to write the descrip‐
tions of their stories. Note that their stories still have short, useful titles.
They found that writing this little extra bit to start to tell the story
forced them to pause and think about: who, what, and why. And, if
they didn’t know, they might question whether they should be writing
the story at all.
When they sat down to have the story conversation, they’d pick up
that card and then read that description. That description started the
conversation.

* Use the simple story template to start conversations. *

If you’re picking up an individual card outside of a story map, the
template is a good way to boot up the conversation. Remember in
Chapter 1 that one of the cards in the body of Gary’s map said, "Upload
an image." And that card was one of the details under the card
"Customize my promo flyer." What I write on the cards in a map are
those short verb phrases—the tasks the users are performing with my
software. But when I pick one up by itself, I’ll need to pick up the story
in the middle of the user’s big journey described in the map. I might
say:
  "As a band manager, I want to upload an image so that I can customize
  my promo flyer."
That’s a pretty cool trick. I can find the cards for different users hanging
above the map, and the users' bigger goal is often in the card above the
one you’re viewing at any one time.
But remember—it’s just a conversation starter. And, in fact, the con‐
versation might continue like this:
  "Why would the band manager want to customize the flyer?"
  "Well, because it won’t have his band’s photo on it automatically, and
  he’d want it to be there. And he cares a lot about being original—he
  wouldn’t want it to look like everyone else’s."
  "That makes sense. Where do people like band managers keep those
  photos?"
  "Well, they’re all over the place, really. They may be on their local hard
  drives, in Flickr accounts, or in other places on the Web."
  "Hmm…that’s different than I was originally thinking. I assumed
  they’d just be on their hard drives."
  "No, lots of the people we’ve talked to have them spread all over the
  place. It’s kind of a problem."
In fact, a lot of the conversation I had with Gary went like that. As we
were talking, we’d write something down on a whiteboard or on the
card itself. Before too long we’d be sketching ideas.
You can see that the very short template isn’t nearly enough to be the
specification. But when we start a conversation using that template,
we end up in a much richer conversation than if we’d just talked about
a file uploader.

### [Rediscovering the Small Conversation]

Mat Cropper, ThoughtWorks
I was working as a business analyst on a ThoughtWorks project for a
UK government agency. We were responsible for delivery, but also
for giving the client team some practical experience around Agile
methodologies. That being the case, we were quite a big team of some
25 or so technologists and businesspeople. One room, 25 different air
conditioning setting preferences—you get the idea!
To start off, the product owner and I would write stories, and then at
the beginning of every two-week iteration, the entire team got to‐
gether for planning. It was a necessarily big meeting, and it was a car
crash. "Why are we doing it this way?" "These stories are way too big/
small." "It doesn’t make sense." "I have this strong preference for a
particular technical implementation." These were common (and frus‐
trating) discussions. To be honest, I left those meetings feeling pretty
dejected. It felt like a personal failure.
Something had to be done to fix this, so we decided that rather than
have one meeting with everybody to discuss everything, we would
move to conversations with a tighter focus. Backlog grooming, for
example, took place in week one of the iteration with a small group
(project owner, project manager, business analyst, technical architect)
who kicked the tires of the various stories so that when we did a
grooming session as a full team later there would be much fewer dis‐
tractions. The conversation was about tweaking and improving our
stories, and we ignored things like prioritization, story points, and so
forth. It worked.
We also made sure that we were much more constructively creating
stories. I’d have an idea of the stories I was working on that week, and
they’d be up on the card wall in the "In Analysis" column. Each day
in our team’s standup, I’d call out that I was working on a particular
story, and could use some time from a developer pair to pull it to‐
gether. We’d sit down, discuss what we were aiming for, usually touch
on the technical aspects, and then get it all down on paper. We ignored
Trello, which we were using for our digital card wall at the time, and
focused instead on the face-to-face conversations, sometimes stand‐
ing at a whiteboard. Working as a group, down in the detail, is actually
pretty rewarding, and as it took only about 20 minutes each time, it
wasn’t too much of an overhead either. People were genuinely happy
to pair and contribute.
As a happy consequence, our large backlog grooming sessions were
a breeze, and we also found that story sizes were becoming more and
more uniform. Iteration planning became less of a pain as a result.
The quality of the conversations leading to the documenting of a story
had improved, and so had the work we were producing.

## Template Zombies and the Snowplow

The term template zombies comes from the book Adrenaline Junkies
and Template Zombies: Understanding Patterns of Project Behavior by
Tom DeMarco et al. (Dorset House). The name says it all, but I’ll give
you the authors' definition:
  Template Zombie:
  The project team allows its work to be driven by templates instead of
  by the thought process necessary to deliver products.
As simple as that template is, it gets abused quite a bit. I see people
really struggle to force ideas into the template when they just don’t fit.
Stories about backend services or security issues can be challenging. I
see people writing and thinking about things from their own perspec‐
tive, not that of the people who ultimately benefit: "as a product owner,
I want you to build a file uploader so that the customer requirements
are met." Nasty things like that.
Even worse, the template has become so ubiquitous, and so commonly
taught, that there are those who believe that it’s not a story if it’s not
written in that form. Many people have even quit using titles on stories
and write only that long sentence on every single card. Imagine trying
to read through a list of stories written that way. Imagine trying to tell
someone a story using a story map where every sticky is written that
way. It’s tough on the brain.
All of this makes me sad. Because the real value of stories isn’t what’s
written down on the card. It comes from what we learn when we tell
the story.

* It doesn’t need to be written in a template to be considered a story. *

The person in this picture is learning to ski.1
 If you’ve ever learned to
ski, and someone helpful is teaching you, you’ll do what this person is
doing. It’s called a snowplow. It’s where you put the tips of your skis
together and lean on the inside edges of your skis. It’s the easiest way
to control your speed and stay upright when you’ve got two slippery
boards clamped to your feet. It’s the way I’d recommend learning to
ski. But it’s not best practice—it’s a best learning practice. There’s no
Olympic snowplow event. You won’t impress anyone on the slopes
with your cool snowplow stance. It’s nothing to be embarrassed of,
though. If people see you skiing that way, they’ll know you’re learning.
For me, the story template works a bit like learning the snowplow. Use
it to write the descriptions of your first stories. Say it aloud to start
your story conversations. But don’t get too concerned if you find that
it doesn’t always work. Just like the snowplow technique for skiers, it’s
not the best choice for difficult terrain.
My favorite template: if I’m writing stories on sticky notes or cards,
and they won’t be sitting inside a bigger story map, I’ll first give them
a short, simple title, and then under it I’ll write:
  Who:
  What:
  Why:
And I’ll give a couple of lines in between each, because I’ll want to
specifically name all the different whos, say a little about the what, and
make notes about the different reasons why. I’ll want to leave room on
the card to add extra information when we start talking about the
stories. It’s actually a pet peeve of mine when people write the title in
the middle of the card, because it doesn’t leave me any room to make
notes when we start talking. But I’m nitpicky that way.

## A Checklist of What to Really Talk About

▢ Really talk about who
  Please don’t just talk about "the user." Be specific. Talk about which
  user you mean. For Gary, he could talk about the band manager
  or the music fan.
  Talk about different types of users. For many pieces of software,
  especially consumer software, there are very diverse types of users
  using the same functionality. Talk about the functionality from
  different users' perspectives.
  Talk about the customers. For consumer products, the customer
  (or chooser) may be the same person as the user. But for enterprise
  products, we’ll need to talk about the people who make buying
  decisions, their organization as a whole, and how they benefit.
  Talk about other stakeholders. Talk about the people sponsoring
  the software’s purchase. Talk about others who might collaborate
  with users.
  There’s rarely just one user who matters.
▢ Really talk about what
  I like my stories to start with user tasks—the things people want
  to do with my software. But what about services like the kind way
  beneath the user interface that authorizes your credit card for a
  purchase, or authenticates you on an insurance website? Your
  users didn’t make a deliberate choice to get their credit cards pass:
  [authorized] or have their credentials verified. It’s OK to talk about
  the services and the different systems that call them. It’s OK to talk
  about specific UI components and how the screen behaves. Just
  don’t lose sight of who cares, and why.
▢ Really talk about why
  Talk about why the specific user cares. And dig deeply into the
  "whys," because there are often a few, and they’re layered. You can
  keep "poking it with the why stick" for a long time to really get at
  the underlying reasons why.
  Talk about why other users care. Talk about why the user’s com‐
  pany cares. Talk about why business stakeholders care. There are
  lots of great things hidden inside why.
▢ Talk about what’s going on outside the software
  Talk about where people using your product are when they use it.
  Talk about when they’d use the product, and how often. Talk about
  who else is there when they do. All those things give clues about
  what a good solution might be.
▢ Talk about what goes wrong
  What happens when things go wrong? What happens when the
  system is down? How else could users accomplish this? How do
  they meet their needs today?
▢ Talk about questions and assumptions
  If you talk about all those things, you’ve likely stumbled across
  something you don’t know. Identify your questions and discuss
  how important they are to get answered before you build software.
  Decide who’ll do the legwork to get those questions answered, and
  bring them back to your next conversation. You’ll find it takes lots
  of conversations to think through some stories.
  Take time to question your assumptions. Do you really under‐
  stand your users? Is this really what they want? Do they really have
  these problems? Will they really use this solution?
  Question your technical assumptions. What underlying systems
  do we rely on? Do they really work the way we think? Are there
  technical risks we need to consider?
  All these questions and assumptions may require deliberate work
  to resolve or learn. Make a plan to do just that.
▢ Talk about better solutions
  The really big win comes when those in a story conversation dis‐
  card some original assumptions about what the solution should
  be, go back to the problem they’re trying to solve, and then to‐
  gether arrive at a solution that’s more effective and more eco‐
  nomical to build.
▢ Talk about how
  When sitting in a story conversation, I often hear someone anx‐
  iously say, "We should be talking about the what, not the how!" By
  that they mean we should be talking about what users need to do,
  not how the code should be written. And I feel the same anxious‐
  ness when we talk about the "what" without talking about the
  "why." But the truth is, we’re trying to optimize for all three in a
  good story conversation. What goes wrong is when either party
  assumes that a particular solution or the way it’s implemented is
  a "requirement." Without explicitly talking about how (and if
  you’re a developer, I know you’re thinking about it), it’s difficult
  to think about the cost of the solution. Because, if a solution is too
  expensive, then it may not be a good option.
  Be respectful of the expertise of others in the conversation. Don’t
  tell a highly trained technical person how to do her work. Don’t
  tell someone intimately familiar with users and their work that he
  doesn’t understand. Ask questions, and genuinely try to learn
  from each other.
▢ Talk about how long
  Ultimately, we need to make some decisions to go forward with
  building something or not. And it’s tough to make this sort of
  buying decision without a price tag.
  For software, that usually means how long it’ll take to write the
  code. In early conversations, that might be expressed as "a really
  long time" or "a few days." Even better is comparing it to some‐
  thing already built—"about the same as that feature for comment‐
  ing we built last month." As we get closer to building something,
  and we’ve had more conversations and made more decisions, we’ll
  be able to be a bit more precise. But we always know we’re talking
  about estimates here, not commitments.

## Create Vacation Photos

Because there’s a lot to talk about, and you won’t want to forget it,
make sure you’re recording specific things that help you remember
the decisions you made, or the questions and assumptions you’ll need
to look into. Don’t forget to externalize your thinking so that others in
the discussion see what’s recorded.
If you write it down, you can pick it up and refer to it later. If it’s posted
on the wall, you can just point at it. And, if you’re talking together as
a team, you’ll find you won’t have to repeat everything so often, because
people will remember—especially if you anchored your conversations
with simple drawings and documents…those vacation photos.
This small group is having a story discussion. As they talk, they visu‐
alize their ideas and make notes about what they decide.
My favorite approach is to do exactly what they’re doing. I record on
flipchart paper or a whiteboard as we talk. I like making a note of who
was in the conversation directly on the board, and then photographing
the board when I’m done. I’ll share the photo using a wiki or other
tool. I know I can extract details or write them up more formally when
I need them later. If I can’t remember exactly what was said, one of
those people in the conversation might. It’s a good thing I wrote their
names down.

## It’s a Lot to Worry About

It’s daunting to think about how much there is you could be talking
about in stories. At this point, you may want to go back to the good
old days when all you needed to do was worry about understanding
the "requirements." Back when it wasn’t your job to really solve prob‐
lems. Back when you just needed to build what you were told to, and
it was someone else’s problem to make sure it was the right thing to
build. But I believe that you, and most people out there, really like
solving problems. So now’s your chance.
It may have occurred to you that with all these things to talk about,
there will be a lot of information to keep track of. And all that stuff
isn’t going to fit on a sticky note or an index card. You’re right. It won’t.
So let’s talk next about what really does go on that card, and what
doesn’t.


