# It’s Not All on the Card

## Introduction

Yes, the big idea was that short story titles on cards would help us plan
and facilitate lots of conversations between the people who could build
software and the people who understood the problems that needed to
be solved with it. But, sadly, it takes more than a couple of people to
get a finished piece of software out the door.
On a typical team you’ll find project managers, product managers,
business analysts, testers, user experience designers, technical writers,
and some other roles I’m probably forgetting. They’re all looking at
the same cards, but the conversations they have are going to be dif‐
ferent because they’ve all got different concerns to look after.

## Different People, Different Conversations

If I’m a product manager or product owner, and I’m responsible for
the success of this product, then I have to know a little more about my
target market. I need to form some hypothesis about how many people
will buy or use this product, or how it’s going to affect the profitability
of my company. I’ll want to talk about those things.
If I’m a business analyst, I might be diving into a lot of details, so I
need to understand what’s going on in the user interface, and the busi‐
ness rules in the system that are behind the user interface.
If I’m a tester, I need to think about where the software is likely to
fail. I need to have some conversations to help me put together a good
test plan.
If I’m a UI designer, I don’t want to be told what the UI looks like any
more than a developer wants to be told the way the code should be
written. I’ll want to know who’s using it, and why and what they’re
doing, so I can design a useful and usable user interface.
Finally, if I’m a project manager responsible for coordinating this
group of people, I’ll have to pay attention when all of them are talking
to make decisions about all these details. I’ll need to pay attention to
dependencies, schedules, and the status of development when it gets
started.
That’s a lot of conversations. And some of them have to happen before
others. And many of them happen more than once. So, to make it
accurate, we’d probably have to add another dozen C s to the 3 C s. But
happily, if you’re really having conversations and building shared un‐
derstanding along the way, you’ll avoid lots of misunderstandings and
course corrections.

* There are many different kinds of conversations with different people for every story. *

## We’re Gonna Need a Bigger Card

When you say the words in that heading, I hope you’re thinking of the
old movie Jaws when, after seeing the huge shark up close and personal
for the first time, Police Chief Brody says to Quint, "You’re gonna need
a bigger boat."
You see, the original idea was also that I could pick up a card and write
the title on the front, and then as we had conversations, I could flip it
over on the back and write the details of all the things we agreed to
that came up. I could sketch the user interface and write a lot of other
information on the card. On some projects, it can really work this way.
It’s cool when it can, and it’s usually a side effect of small teams working
closely together with a lot of tacit knowledge. Those are the teams that
don’t have to write much to remember.
But I don’t think even Kent and the folks who perfected the concept
of stories actually thought that all these conversations between all these
different people could be contained on just a single card, and in fact,
they usually aren’t.
The metaphor that works for me is a card in a library card catalog, for
people who are old enough to remember when libraries actually had
card catalogs. Stories written on cards work a bit like those.
If I pick up a card from a card catalog, it’s going to have just enough
information for me to identify the book. It likely has a title, the author
name, a description, the page count of the book, the category of the
book—like "nonfiction"—and a code (remember Mr. Dewey’s deci‐
mals?) to a location where I can actually find a copy of the book in the
library. The card’s just a token that’s easy to find and organize. No one
confuses the cards with a book. The card catalog is handy because it
takes a lot less space than thousands of books would. And I can orga‐
nize cards in different ways—by author, for example, or by subject.
Your stories will work the same way; that is, you may write them on
cards, keep them in a list in a spreadsheet, enter them into your favorite
tracking tool, or enter them in the tracking tool your company makes
you use—you know, the one everyone grumbles about. In a library,
you know there’s a book out there somewhere, and if you have iden‐
tified the right card filed away in the card catalog, it’s easy to find it.
Similarly, with a story, you know there’s a growing amount of infor‐
mation out there somewhere. It grows and evolves with each conver‐
sation. And, hopefully, however your company chooses to keep track
of the information, it’s easy to find, too.
If you want to go really old school, keep the details of all those dis‐
cussions taped onto big sheets of flipchart paper on the wall so you
can keep talking about them whenever you want. But remember: you’ll
want to take them down when you’ve completed the work or else you’ll
run out of wall space. And you’ll want to photograph them and keep
those photos somewhere for posterity.

### [How Tool Creators Have Good Story Discussions]

This is my friend Sherif, who’s a product manager at a company called
Atlassian. Atlassian makes Confluence, a popular wiki used in a huge
variety of organizations to keep track of the knowledge those organ‐
izations accumulate, among other things. They also make JIRA, one
of the more popular tools for managing work in Agile development.
You’d think a company that focuses on building tools used for keeping
and sharing information electronically would use its own tools— "eat
their own dog food," so to speak—and you’d be right that Atlassian
does. But it also understands how to have good face-to-face
conversations.
When I walk around the Atlassian office in Sydney, I see the walls
covered with sticky notes, whiteboard drawings, and screen wire‐
frames. If you look closely, you’ll see that the sticky notes reference
ticket numbers in those tools the team relies on. They nimbly move
back and forth from tools to physical space. When Sherif shows me
what they keep in Confluence, I’m amazed at the combination of
photographs, short videos, and back-and-forth discussions.

## Radiators and Ice Boxes

In his book Agile Software Development: The Cooperative Game
(Addison-Wesley Professional), Alistair Cockburn coined the term
information radiator to describe how big, visible information on the
wall radiates useful stuff into the room. People walking by look at it
and engage with it. When the information is alive and useful, lots of
conversations end up at the wall, where people can point to and add
to the information accumulating there.
When I walk into environments where the walls are clear, or even
covered with pleasant artwork—or worst of all, motivational posters
—it makes me sad. There’s so much great collaboration that could be
happening every day with those useful walls. If what’s on the wall is an
information radiator, some refer to the tools people use as an infor‐
mation icebox—because that’s where information goes to be preserved
—and potentially be crusted over with that thin layer of ice like that
stuff in the back of your freezer. (I’m always shocked by what I find
back there.)
That’s what’s really remarkable to me about Atlassian. They keep in‐
formation alive and useful, both in and out of the tools they use.

### [What’s Really on a Story Card?]

Imagine a card from a library’s card catalog. That card’s got useful
information on it to help you organize it and confirm you’re talking
about the right book. A good story card is a bit like that.
Common things you’d expect to find on a card are:
Short title
  One that’s easy to insert into a conversation when you’re talking
  about it. A good title is the most valuable part of your story. Don’t
  be afraid to rewrite it if it’s confusing people.
Description
  A sentence or two that describes what we’re imagining. It’s a good
  idea to describe who, what, and why—who uses or needs it, what
  they’ll do with it, and what benefit they hope to get from it.
  As you begin to discuss stories, you’ll add information that summa‐
  rizes some of your discussions. That’ll include stuff like:
Story number
  When you get a bunch of these or put them into a tracking system,
  this will help you find them—sort of like the Dewey Decimal
  System in a library. But, whatever you do, please don’t start re‐
  ferring to your stories by their number. If you do, it’s a sure signal
  you haven’t chosen a very good title. And even librarians don’t
  refer to books by their Dewey Decimal numbers.
Estimate, size, or budget
  As you begin to discuss the story, you’ll want a prediction on how
  long it might take to build the software. There are lots of terms
  for this, like estimate, size, or budget. Use the term your company
  uses.
Value
  You might have lengthy discussions about the relative value of
  one thing over another. Some might use a numeric scale. Some
  might annotate cards with high, medium, or low.
Metrics
  If you really care about results, identify specific metrics you’ll
  track after the software is released to determine whether the soft‐
  ware was successful.
Dependencies
  Other stories that this one might depend on or go with.
Status
  Is it planned for a particular release? Is it started? In progress?
  Done?
Dates
  Just as a book’s card has the date it was published, you might keep
  the date this story was added, started, and finished.
You could scribble any other notes you like on the card. Or flip it to
the back and write notes or bulleted acceptance criteria.
The only thing that’s required on your card is a good title. All those
other bits of information could be helpful, but you and your team get
to decide which you’d like to use.
Not too much fits on the card, and that’s good. Remember, it’s just a
token you’ll use to plan with. You could use cards, or sticky notes, too.
Having the physical cards lets you use handy words like this and that
in conversations as you point to cards on a wall or tabletop. You can’t
do that with a thick document. With cards, you can shuffle them
around a desk, rank them by importance, tape them to the wall, and
wave them around while you’re talking to make your point more em‐
phatically. If you were doing that with a thick document, you could
hurt someone—perhaps yourself. And, of course, you’ll want to ar‐
range bunches of cards into story maps to tell even bigger stories.

## That’s Not What That Tool Is For

A lumberjack comes across a man in the forest. The man is working
hard trying to chop down a tree by hitting it with a hammer. The
lumberjack stops the man and says, "Hey, you’re using the wrong tool!
Try this…" and hands the man a saw. The man thanks him, and the
lumberjack continues on his way, happily knowing that he’s helped.
The man then begins striking the tree with the saw the same way he
was with the hammer.
This joke reminds me that we can use the wrong tool for the job, and
we can also use the tool wrong.
When I tell people how companies like Atlassian use tools, they’re
usually surprised. They’re often surprised because they’ve been trying
to use tools as a replacement for whiteboards and sticky notes. And,
predictably, they’ve been struggling with that. It may be that they’re
using the wrong tool for the wrong job, or using the right tool wrong.
To figure out what might be going wrong, it’s best to look at the job
first, and not the tool.

### Building Shared Understanding

When we’re working together to tell stories and make decisions about
solutions to build, our first goal is to build shared understanding. This
is where externalizing and organizing your thoughts is critical. And
nothing beats face-to-face work in front of a whiteboard, armed with
sticky notes. But, if you’ve got to accomplish this task with others
working remotely, this is tough. Video conference tools that let you
see one another’s faces don’t help much, since it’s not their faces you
need to see—it’s the ideas you’ll be placing on the wall or tabletop.

* Use a document camera or web camera dur‐
ing a video conference to let remote people see
what’s being created on the wall. *

I’ve worked with teams that have video cameras at both ends of a video
conference, and the call focuses on the growing models on the wall,
not the team members' faces.
If you use a tool to visualize, it’s ideal if people on both sides of the
conversation can add and move things around, just like they could if
they were working together at a whiteboard. This is a screen from a
tool called Cardboard.
The person using Cardboard is creating a map at the same time as
David Hussman, one of Cardboard’s creators, maps on a wall. Others
who are sharing the same map from other locations see it come to‐
gether in real time. They can add, remove, and change cards, and ev‐
eryone can see what everyone else is doing. You can virtually "step
back" and look at the entire wall at once, which is handy because com‐
puter screens are just a tiny portal on what you could see if you were
working at a wall.

* When collaborating remotely, use tools that
allow everyone to see, add to, and organize
the model concurrently. *

Happily, I’m seeing a lot more tools enter the market that understand
and support working together to build shared understanding. This is
a good thing.

### Remembering

When we’ve worked hard together to get on the same page, we should
be keeping copies of whatever models or examples we’ve created to
use as vacation photos—to help us remember all the details we’ve dis‐
cussed. Tools like Atlassian’s Confluence offer a rich wiki for storing
not just words, but also pictures and video. Taking and keeping pic‐
tures and videos after working together is one of fastest ways to
document.
These folks at Atlassian are doing just that. They’ve snapped a picture
after working at a wall, and uploaded it to their wiki for safekeeping.

* Use tools to post pictures, videos, and text to
help you retain and remember your
conversations. *

I personally like staying lo-fi and keeping information on the wall, but
if I worry at all about a cleaning person taking it down at night, I’ll
photograph and keep it just in case. If I’m sharing information with
people who couldn’t be in the room, even virtually, I’ll shoot a short
video stepping through the model on the wall and post that where
others can see it.

### Tracking

Use tools to sequence, track, and analyze
One of the things that tools most excel at is taking all the work we’ve
planned on doing, and letting us track its progress. Tools are great at
keeping track of the numbers that are tedious for us—things like ex‐
actly when we started, when we finished, and how much we’ve got left
to do. The better tools will generate useful insights for us as we rou‐
tinely track what we’re doing.
This is a cumulative flow diagram generated by Atlassian’s JIRA prod‐
uct. It’s a chart that shows the work we’re doing and its state over time.
And it’s a chart I would hate to produce by hand.
For single, collocated teams and small projects, the wall will do just
fine. But, if you’ve got larger teams working from different physical
locations, and longer-running projects, use a tool to keep track of all
the details.

* Use tools to sequence, track, and analyze
progress. *

The trick is using the right tool for the right job. Don’t try to use a really
great tracking tool to build shared understanding. And don’t struggle
to do complex analysis on a whiteboard.
It’s been an Agile ideal to keep things simple and fast, to stay working
on index cards and whiteboards as much as possible. And I promise
you if you can stay small and fast and avoid unnecessary tools, you’ll
be happier. But remember: those tools are just a means to an end. Next,
we’ll need to talk about what happens after the card. 