# The Card Is Just the Beginning

# Introduction

The three C s are just the beginning.
I know I said earlier that I don’t feel obligated to quote the Agile Man‐
ifesto, but I’m going to anyway—well, at least a small part of it. One of
the value statements in the manifesto reads "Working software over
comprehensive documentation." I could rephrase that as "working
software over comprehensive conversation," and the meaning would
be the same. All those conversations—and the documentation that
helps us recall them—are just a means to an end. Eventually we’ll need
to build something
There are some gotchas that always manage to sneak in here after we’ve
got shared understanding and agreement on what we’ll build. Keep an
eye out for them.

## Construct with a Clear Picture in Your Head

After having conversations, and writing down details that’ll help us
remember those conversations, and writing down confirmation—that
is, our agreement about the things we’ll check to confirm we’re done
—we’re finally ready to make something:
• Software developers can get started building the software.
• Testers can create test plans and test.
• UI designers can create detailed UI design and digital assets, if
they haven’t already done so as part of arriving at a shared
understanding.
• Technical writers can write or update help files or other
documents.
The most important thing here is that all these people are armed with
the same picture in their heads: the picture they built while talking
together.
I’m going to pause here for effect.
Now, I’m going to say this next part slowly, so you should read it slowly.

* Handing off all the details about the story to
someone else to build doesn’t work.
Don't do that. *

If you and a group of people have worked together to understand what
should be built, and if you’ve documented all the important things
someone needs to know to build it, you may be very tempted here to
hand it off to someone else. After all, when you look at the information,
it’s crystal clear to you. But don’t fool yourself. It’s clear to you because
your really smart brain is filling in all the details that aren’t written
down. Your brain is so good at it that it’s hard for you to detect what
could be missing. Remember, those details are your vacation photos,
not theirs.

## Build an Oral Tradition of Storytelling

Sharing stories is reasonably simple. Someone who does understand
the story, and the information collected that helps tell the story, needs
only spend a little time retelling the story to the next person who needs
to learn. Now, this should go lots faster than early conversations where
you worked together to make tough decisions, since hopefully you
won’t need to remake them. Use what’s written to help tell the story.
Talk and point to pictures. Let your listener ask questions and make
changes to the pictures that help her remember. Help her turn the
information associated with the story into her own vacation photos.
There’s a nasty anti-pattern I often see here. Some think that since
anyone in a team might pick up the story and do work on it, everyone
on the team should be involved in every conversation. Perhaps you
work at this company. You’ll know it because you’ll hear lots of people
complaining that there are way too many meetings. By the way, "meet‐
ing" is often the euphemism we use for unproductive collaboration.
Effective discussion and decision making goes best with small groups
of two to five. It’s dinner conversation sized. You know that if you have
a group of friends sharing a meal, it’s easy to hold a single conversation
when there are just a few of you. But any more than about five people
is where it becomes a real effort.
Let small groups work together to make decisions, and then use con‐
tinued conversations to share the results with everyone else.

## Inspect the Results of Your Work

If you’re on the team, you’ll all work together armed with shared un‐
derstanding about what you’re building, and why. As you work to‐
gether, you’ll keep having conversations because you never think of
everything. But when the software is done, you’ll all come back to‐
gether and talk about it.
This is a good time to congratulate yourselves on a job well done. It’s
pretty cool to see real progress. In traditional software development,
the opportunities to see the results of your hard work can come a lot
less frequently, and they’re rarely shared as a team. In a typical Agile
process like Scrum, you’ll be sharing every couple of weeks at an endof-sprint product review. In the healthiest of teams, team members get
together frequently to inspect their work as it’s done. But you’ll need
to go beyond show and tell. After congratulating yourselves, take time
for a short but serious reflection on the quality of the work you did.
When talking about quality, I start with discussions of these three
aspects:
User experience quality
  Review the work from the perspective of its target user. Is it
  straightforward to use? Is it fun to use? Does it look good? Is it
  consistent with your brand and other functionality?
Functional quality
  Does the software do what you agreed it would without bugs or
  errors? Testers and other team members have hopefully spent time
  testing and you’ve fixed any bugs already. But good testers can
  often tell you that there are likely more bugs lurking in your prod‐
  uct that may emerge later. Or hopefully they can say that it feels
  rock solid.
Code quality
  Is the software we wrote high quality? Consistent with our stand‐
  ards? We may own this stuff for a while, so it’d be good to know
  if we think it’ll be easy to extend and maintain, or if we’ve just
  added a pile of technical debt we’ll need to address later.
I have some bad news for you here. You’re likely to find things you
believe should change about what you’ve done.
It’ll help everyone’s sanity to separate out two concerns. First: did we
build what we agreed to build? And then: if it’s what we agreed to build,
now that we see it, should we make some changes?
Everyone will have worked hard together at the outset to figure out
what to build that would solve users' problems and be economical to
build. You’ll have done your best to identify the things to check to
confirm that it’s done. Check all those things, and congratulate your‐
selves if you’ve accomplished that much. You got exactly what you
agreed you wanted to get.
Now, here’s where some old Rolling Stones song lyrics play in my head.
If you know the song, hum along: "You can’t always get what you want.
But, if you try sometime, you just might find, you get what you need."
The irony with software is that it’s exactly the opposite.
You’ll work together to agree on what you want. And, if you’re working
with a competent team, you’ll see that you can get pretty good at getting
it. It’s only after seeing it, though, that you can better evaluate if it’s
what you need. This sucks. But don’t blame yourselves—that’s just the
way it works.
You do, however, have a way of fixing it. And it starts by writing a card
with your ideas about what to change in the software to fix it. This, of
course, sucks if you’d planned on being right the first time. Maybe
Mick Jagger was right after all. Maybe what you really needed was to
learn that being right the first time is a risky strategy—especially in
software.

## It’s Not for You

I’m sorry. I’ve got even more bad news.
In reality, the person who originally wrote the card and who started
this entire cycle is likely not the person who will use the software every
day. The person who originally wrote the card, and the entire team
who worked together, may believe they’ve nailed it—that they’ve built
the perfect solution to the challenges their target users have.
Don’t fool yourself.
If we’re on this team together and we’re smart, we’ll take the software
out to users and test it with them. This isn’t show and tell, either. We’ll
test by watching them use the software to reach a real goal they’ll nor‐
mally need to accomplish using the software.
Have you ever sat with someone as she uses software you’ve helped
build? Think back to the first time you did. How did it go? I wasn’t in
the room with you at the time, but I’m willing to bet that it didn’t go
the way you expected.
If you’ve ever sat next to a user as she uses your product, you know
what I mean. If you’ve never done this, then do it.
You’ll need to test with the people who’ll actually buy, adopt, and use
your product at some regular frequency. I often wait until I’ve built up
a bit of software—enough that they could use it to accomplish some‐
thing they couldn’t before. Whatever frequency you adopt, don’t let
more than a couple weeks go by without seeing a genuine user interact
with the software.
Everyone on the team doesn’t need to be there with users. In fact, it’ll
kind of creep the users out if everyone is. But being there builds
empathy that you won’t get any other way. It’s a powerful motivator to
see people struggling to use your product, especially when you were
so confident they wouldn’t need to. If you were there, share what you
saw with others by telling stories back to them.
After testing with users, you’ll identify problems to fix and obvious
ways to improve the software. And for each one of those things, you
should write a story card with your ideas for improving the software.

## Build to Learn

If you’d labored under the belief that using stories would stop your
team from writing bad software, you were at least half right. In fact,
all the conversations between smart people focused on understanding
the problem—and how what we’re building solves it—go a long way
toward making a much better product. But we need to acknowledge
that building software isn’t the same as working on an assembly line.
You’re not just building one more widget like the one you built a few
minutes ago. Each new story we create software to support is some‐
thing new.
One of the luminaries in the Agile development community is my
aforementioned friend, Alistair Cockburn, who once told me, "For
every story you write, you need to put three into your backlog of
stories."
I asked him why, and he said, "You just do."
I asked, "What should I write on the other two?"
"It doesn’t matter what you write."
"What do you mean?" I asked, "I have to write something on them!"
Alistair replied, "Well, if you have to write something on them, then
write what you want on the first card, and on the second card write
‘Fix the first card.' Then on the third card, write ‘Fix the second one.'
If you aren’t going around this cycle three times for each story, you’re
not learning."
In a traditional process, learning gets referred to as scope creep or bad
requirements. In an Agile process, learning is the purpose. You’ll need
to plan on learning from everything you build. And you’ll need to plan
on being wrong a fair bit of the time.
Eric’s strategy used in Chapter 3 helped him build smaller solutions
and continue to iterate them until they were viable. Eric counted on
learning from every release.
The Mona Lisa strategy used by Mike and Aaron in Chapter 4 helped
them slice every story down into smaller, thinner, undeliverable bits
so they could learn sooner and manage their delivery budget wisely to
finish on time.
These are both great learning strategies. Try those. Invent your own.
But please don’t assume you’re always right. I promise you’ll be
disappointed.

## It’s Not Always Software

In 2011, Kent Beck—the creator of the story—opened one of the first
Lean Startup conferences with his revision of the Agile Manifesto. If
I’d done it, it might have been blasphemy. But he’s one of its creators,
so he should know. He revised the value about working software to
read:
Validated learning over working software (or comprehensive
documentation)
If you remember from Chapter 3, validated learning is the supervaluable concept that comes from the Lean Startup process. The key
word there is learning. What makes it validated learning is discussing
what we want to learn as part of making something, and then going
back and considering the consequences—reflecting on what we learned
or didn’t learn. And one of the things we’re realizing is that we don’t
always need to build software to learn. But we do usually need to make
or do something.
I like using stories to drive the work we do to build simple prototypes,
or to plan the work we’re doing to interview or observe users. I like
talking about the who, what, and why for those things, too. I like
agreeing on what we’ll make before we make it. And I look back at the
consequences of having done it to consider what we’ve learned.

* Try using stories to drive the making of any‐
thing, whether it’s software or not. *

## Plan to Learn, and Learn to Plan

Story maps are useful for breaking up our big product or feature ideas
into smaller parts. Chapter 3 and Chapter 4 were about slicing up those
smaller parts into buildable chunks where each chunk was focused on
learning something. But there’s a different way to break things down
that you need to be aware of, and to keep separate in your head. It’s the
work we do to break down a story into our plan to make something.
That’s what we’ll talk about in the next chapter.