# Bake Stories Like Cake

## Introduction

Two weeks ago it was my daughter’s birthday and we wanted a cake.
Our family has our own baker—a person we call to make our cakes.
Now, we’re not rich or afraid to make cakes ourselves. It’s just that
Sydnie, our baker, makes incredibly fantastic-tasting cakes. We don’t
know exactly what culinary magic she wields to pull it off, but when‐
ever we ask our kids what kind of cake they want for their birthday,
the shout "We want a Sydnie cake!" seals the deal for our baker.
To get a cake, I call Sydnie on the phone. She’ll ask who the cake is for
and what the occasion is. Two weeks ago I told her Grace was turning
12. "What’s Grace into?" she asks. We talk a bit about what Grace likes
and what she was thinking of. We also talk about what shapes of cake
pans Sydnie has, and what kind of cake design is feasible for her to
have ready in time. We agree on a bird-shaped cake this time.
That’s how telling a story works. Sydnie asked lots of who, what, and
why questions. She asked about the context—where and when we’d be
serving the cake, and how many people would be there. During the
conversations, we considered a few different options. We talked long
enough to build shared understanding. And, because we’ve gotten lots
of cakes from Sydnie, we already have some shared understanding
about how they’ll look and taste when we get them. If we didn’t, we’d
have wanted to see some pictures or taste some cake, and the phone
wouldn’t have worked well for that.

## Create a Recipe

During our discussion, Sydnie is thinking about how she’ll make the
cake. She has to so she can figure out if she can make it in time. When
it comes time to make the cake, she’ll have a list of things she’ll need
to do—things like measuring flour, sugar, butter, eggs, and milk. She’ll
need to mix, bake, decorate, and likely perform some other top-secret
steps I don’t know about. I suspect she has different recipes for different
kinds of cakes, and a checklist of things she has to do for every cake
before it’s stuck in a box and ready to pick up. If Sydnie wrote down
the list of all the things she has to do, she’d have a work plan full of
specific cake-baking tasks.
The same thing happens when someone brings a story to a develop‐
ment team. Together they make decisions on specifically what to build,
and the development team creates their work plan, composed of lots
of development tasks. The development team includes testers, UI de‐
signers, technical writers, or whatever people and skills are necessary
to create the software, so the tasks aren’t all about coding. And, just
like Sydnie didn’t create her plan while she talked with me on the
phone, the development team won’t likely create their plan during the
story conversation. But they will listen, take notes, draw pictures, and
gather lots of the details they’ll need to create their plan. At least, that’s
the way we hope it goes.
When talking with Sydnie, I don’t tell stories about cups of sugar and
flour. I wouldn’t tell a story about baking unless my goal was to build
an oven. When you tell stories about software, and collect a list of story
names as you do, you tell the story imagining the software you’ll have
in the end. And you don’t just imagine the software—you think and
talk about who uses it and why. Sydnie didn’t just stick to details about
the cake, she asked me who it was for, what my daughter liked, how
many people would be at the party, and lots of information that helped
us decide together what the best cake should be. Sydnie wasn’t just
asking for cake requirements, we were working together to decide on
the best way to create a cake we’d all love. That’s the real spirit behind
a story conversation.

## Breaking Down a Big Cake

But there’s just one thing. Often what goes wrong here is that, when
we start telling the story to people who are really capable of turning
our vision into reality, we quickly figure out that the software our story
describes is really big. Well, the card it’s written on is the same size as
all the others. And the goal our users are trying to reach with it may
be no more important to them than others, but it’s when we talk about
it that we realize it’ll take a lot of time to write the software necessary
to reach that goal.
The same thing could have happened when I was talking with Sydnie
about my cake. I could have imagined an elaborate cake that calls for
cake pans Sydnie doesn’t have, or cake-building and decorating tech‐
niques she’s not mastered. The result would be a cake I can’t afford,
and one that Sydnie couldn’t predictably deliver before my daughter’s
birthday.
In Chapter 7, I pointed out that when the solution we’re thinking of is
too expensive, we need to step back and really look at the problems
we’re trying to solve, and the outcomes we’re trying to achieve. And
we’ll need to consider other alternatives. That’s one way to get a smaller
cake—or maybe a pie?

* If the story describes a solution that’s too expensive, consider a different solution that helps you reach the goal. *

But, if it’s really big, and we can afford it, then there’s no reason to
break it down any smaller, right? Well, actually, there is. With software,
especially, by building things in smaller parts, we can see and measure
progress sooner. This helps the people spending money feel a bit less
nervous. And, as in Chapter 4's Mona Lisa strategy, it helps the people
making the product evaluate parts to make sure we’re on the right
track.

* If the story describes a solution that’s affordable but big, break it into smaller parts that allow you to evaluate and see progress sooner. *

There’s a trick to breaking down large stories, and it helps me to keep
the cake metaphor in my head. If you like cake, by now you might be
getting hungry—especially if the cake you’re imagining is a particu‐
larly tasty one. Sorry about that.
Let’s say our story describes a need for a lot bigger cake, like a supergiant wedding cake that will feed hundreds of people. If so, then it isn’t
just cups of flour and sugar anymore, it’s sacks of flour and sugar. Most
people break down software the same way. Instead of just a little user
interface, a little business logic, and a little database interaction, there’s
lots of each. But remember that software isn’t cake. It doesn’t take that
much more time to measure two pounds of flour than it does to meas‐
ure two cups of flour. But building the user interface for 20 screens
takes a lot more time than for just 2 screens. So, if teams use the simple
breakdown structure that seems logical, they get tempted to break
software down into weeks of frontend development, weeks of business
logic development, and so on. When we use that strategy, it takes a
long time before we can "taste any cake," so to speak. So don’t do that.

* Don’t break down big things into big plans.  Break big things into small things with small plans. *

Now the metaphor is really going to break down here, but stick with
me for just one more minute. The way you approach a big software
cake is to break it down into lots of little cupcakes. Each one is deliv‐
erable, and each one still has a similar recipe, with a little sugar, a little
flour, an egg or two, and so on.
OK, now let’s get a little more serious again. Software isn’t cake. It can
get huge, horrendously expensive, and horribly risky. As I write this
text, I’ve just heard yet another story on the morning television news
of the US government’s failed website to sign people up for healthcare.
It’s easy to criticize after the fact. But it’s also easy to see that no one
tasted that cake before it was served at the metaphoric wedding—at
least no one with any taste. And that half-baked cake ruined the party.
If you’ve worked in more traditional software development for a while,
you likely learned to break down big software into big plans. I know I
did. It’ll seems counterintuitive to break down something big into
smaller pieces that may not quite look like the finished product you’re
trying to deliver. You’ll know that as you combine these pieces of soft‐
ware, you’ll have to do a bit of rewriting and adjusting of each piece
to combine them. But remember—you’re thinking this way for lots of
good reasons. One of the biggest is to avoid the risks involved with not
seeing, using, or "tasting" the software too late. You’re breaking big
things down to small, evaluable parts so you can learn sooner.
If I were breaking down a cake with the goal of tasting it sooner or
seeing the decoration sooner, I’d do well to bake small cupcakes that
help me learn sooner. I’d bake some in a number of different flavors
so I could taste them all, choose the one I liked best, and be confident
I’d made the right choice. If I were concerned about colors and deco‐
ration, I’d want to look at different cupcakes decorated in different
styles, and choose the one that was best.
With software, the cupcakes are portions of working software that
allow users to evaluate if they can effectively complete a user task. They
may be portions of software that help expose a technical risk. But each
piece helps us learn something.
But a pile of cupcakes isn’t a wedding cake—or is it?1
Software isn’t cake. And every piece of software we build does combine
into one larger working product in a way that cake can’t.
One of the silly mantras that comes from my friend Luke Hohman is
that you can deliver "half a baked cake, not a half-baked cake." Half a
baked cake may not be enough to feed a wedding party, but it’s enough
to taste and leave everyone looking forward to the rest of the cake.