# Rock Breaking

## Introduction

The original idea of stories was pretty simple—write something on a
card, talk about it, and agree on what to build. Then, complete the
cycle by building it and learning from what you’ve built. That’s it—
pretty straightforward, right? If you’ve been involved in software de‐
velopment for even a small amount of time, you know nothing is that
simple. Stories go through a long journey with lots of conversations
involving lots of people to move an idea for a product, feature, or
enhancement into your product, and then move that product out to
market. The good news is you can use stories and storytelling all the
way through. And I promise that relying on stories and storytelling
will help you all the way through.

## Size Always Matters

I ended the last chapter by talking about Sydnie’s cake and the idea of
breaking big cakes into little cakes. But software is a lot less tangible,
and size can’t be measured in inches, centimeters, ounces, or grams
like it can with a cake.
The original idea was that a user or a person who needs something
could write what he needed on a card and then we could have a con‐
versation about that. The person who needed it didn’t figure out how
to express his need as something that would take only a short time to
develop. It was need sized.

* A right-sized story from a user’s perspective is one that fulfills a need. *

When it comes time to write software, there’s big benefit in writing,
testing, and integrating software in small parts. If I can see and test
small parts sooner, I can measure how fast we’re building and what
kind of quality we’re getting. If I can divide something big into lots of
smaller parts, it makes it a little easier for my team to pick up and build
parts concurrently. A good rule of thumb is to break down stories to
something that takes a couple of days to build and test.

* A right-sized story from a development team’s perspective is one that takes just a few days to build and test. *

But, from a business perspective, it may make the most sense to release
software to customers and users in bundles of multiple features. If
you’re releasing a whole new product, that first bundle can be pretty
large. This is the bundle I called a minimum viable solution earlier, and
it’s focused on reaching specific outcomes for a target group of users.
Ideally, businesses should be striving to release more of these more
frequently—to push them closer to matching users' need size, or a
smaller and more specific business outcome. But, if you’ve got a large,
diverse group of customers using your product, and you don’t have an
infrastructure or business model that supports a more continuous re‐
lease process, then your business’s releases may be bigger.

* A right-sized story from a business perspective is one that helps a business achieve a business outcome. *

I could say there’s no "right size" for stories, but that’s not true. The
right size is the size that’s relevant to the conversation you’re having.
Those big stories contain lots of smaller stories, which in turn contain
lots more smaller stories. Depending on who you’re talking to, you
might have to "roll up" your conversation to a higher level.

## Stories Are Like Rocks

Think of stories like rocks. If I were to take a really big rock and put
it in the middle of the floor and hit it with a mallet where it broke into
30 pieces, we’d call those 30 pieces rocks. If you took one of those
smaller rocks and hit it with a mallet, it would break into smaller pieces.
We’d call those pieces rocks, too. Now, we might get creative about the
names we give these rocks, like boulder or pebble. But I’m never sure
when something stops being a boulder and starts being just a plain old
rock. It looks like a rock until it’s dropped on your foot. Then it feels
like a boulder.
My rock-breaking tool is a big mallet. And that works pretty well.
Big stories break down into smaller stories, and those smaller stories
can be broken down to even smaller stories. Just like rocks. And, at
every size—no matter how small—they’re still a story. But what’s the
best tool we use for breaking down stories? That’s right: it’s conversa‐
tion. Sometimes just a little thinking will do it, but if you use conver‐
sation and collaboration with someone else, then you’re spreading the
shared understanding.

* Conversations are one of the best tools for breaking down big stories. *

Now software people, and I’m one of them, are uncomfortable with
the lack of precision here. In most organizations I’ve worked with,
language will emerge to classify stories by size. But it starts to raise the
"boulders versus pebbles" question again. The precision about size
matters most when you’re the one being hit with the rock, which could
explain why software people get wrapped up in classifying their stories.
If you create language in your organization, don’t try to be too precise.
The wiggliness about what’s in a story and how big it should be is
intentional. It gives us the flexibility we need to use this simple idea
throughout the development cycle.

## Epics Are Big Rocks Sometimes Used to Hit People

Epic is a common term (I’m not sure who coined it originally) used to
describe big user stories, sort of like boulder is a good term for a big
rock. Now I’ll be honest with you that it took me years to get com‐
fortable referring to the important stuff we were building as stories,
but I understand now why they’re called that. I’m still struggling with
the term epic. I hear my English Literature teacher describing an epic
as a story about a hero battling evil—like Beowulf or Achilles or Frodo
—usually with some sort of magic weapon or the assistance of the gods.
But, I digress…

* An epic is a story that we expect is large, and know needs to be broken down. *

It’s OK to have a term for a large story, but watch out. The term epic
sometimes gets used as a weapon. I’ve often seen a development team
member tell someone who is a businessperson, a product manager, a
user, or someone who’s asking for something, that his story is an epic,
not a story. This is usually said in a tone that indicates the storywriter
has done something wrong, causing her to seriously consider suckerpunching the development team member. So, please, if you are a team
member, don’t use the term epic as a stick to reprimand someone else.
It’s a bad start (and, possibly, a premature ending) to what should be
a productive conversation.
Remember, epics are big stories that may be the right size from a busi‐
ness, customer, or user perspective—just not from a development
perspective. Work together to break them down. But keep the epic
around because you’ll need to speak to people about it, and all the
detailed stories it broke down into.
If you’re using an electronic tool that supports Agile development, it’ll
likely use the concept of an epic as a big parent story that can be split
up into lots of smaller child stories.

## Themes Organize Groups of Stories

Use the term theme to describe a group of stories that it’s useful to
group together. As you start rock breaking—breaking down those big
stories and organizing them into products that people want, can use,
and can afford to build—you’ll end up with lots of smaller stories. I
think of a theme as a sack I can use to collect a pile of stories that are
related. I could use a theme to collect a bunch of stories that are needed
for a next release, part of the same feature, relevant to a particular type
of user, or related in some other way. But my metaphor is slightly bro‐
ken since the same story can be in two different themes, but the same
rock can’t be in two different sacks.
If you use one of the available tools that help organize groups of Agile
stories, it may support the concept of bundling stories up into a theme.
You might simply refer to the theme by what it really is: your next
release, the feature, or the stories relevant to a particular type of user.

## Forget Those Terms and Focus on Storytelling

The terms epic and theme have found their way into Agile lifecycle
management tools, into some specific named Agile approaches, and
into the common language used to discuss stories. For that reason,
you’ll need to know and understand them.
Now, let’s set aside those terms; forget I even mentioned them. At least
for a little while. Let’s step back and take a look at the whole rockbreaking lifecycle. In that cycle we’ll start with big ideas, which you
can think of as the big rocks, and move them all the way through to
small pieces of working software. And then reassemble those small
pieces of working software into features, products, and releases that
customers and users want.
From a distance, that rock-breaking cycle looks like this:
Now, let’s dig into the details.

## Start with Opportunities

The story’s journey starts as an idea. It may be an idea for a new feature,
or a whole new product. It could be a change we’d like that would
improve a feature we already have. It could be a problem we need to
solve. But I’ll use the term opportunity, because it’s an opportunity for
us to make something that we’ll benefit from. I suggest you name and
build a list of these opportunities. I call them an opportunity backlog.
Our first good story conversation is a higher-level, who-what-why
discussion. And our big goal is to make a go/no-go decision. Go doesn’t
mean we’ll build it. It means we’ll go forward with deeper-dive dis‐
cussions to really understand the story. But I don’t want to move for‐
ward with spending lots of time doing this if we can detect that it’s a
bad idea from the outset. No-go is a polite way of saying "trash." So,
let’s call this a go-forward/trash decision. Remember, there’s always
too much to build, and killing a mediocre opportunity before it wastes
too much of everyone’s time should be celebrated.

* Use opportunity discussions to agree the problem is worth solving—to make a goforward or trash decision. *

## Discover a Minimum Viable Solution

Now that you’ve chosen to go forward, it’s time to dig much deeper.
Use discovery to find a solution worth building. And don’t forget to
really minimize that solution. Seek to make it as small and valuable as
you can.
During discovery you’ll really dig deep into:
• Who the customers and users are you believe will use your
solution
• How they meet their needs today without your solution
• How the world would change for them with your solution
• How your solution might look and behave
• How long your solution might take to build
There are a huge number of practices that can be helpful during dis‐
covery, especially story mapping. Story mapping can help you under‐
stand how people work today, and then map your ideas about how
things will change for them after your solution is created.
Discovery is where it’s critical to look hard at our assumptions and to
do work to validate them. This may take the form of deeper analysis
to understand business rules or outside regulations. It should take the
form of spending time directly with customers and users to under‐
stand how they work. It should involve building prototypes of your
solution and validating them with your target audience. And it should
include building technical prototypes to chase out technical risks.

* Use discovery conversations and exploration to find a small, viable solution. *

Celebrate every part of that solution that you can safely trash, or push
back to a backlog of opportunities to deal with elsewhere. Our oppor‐
tunities may have been big rocks. But inside those rocks were dia‐
monds and precious metals. Break down those rocks and separate
those really valuable parts from the stuff that’s just rock. And celebrate
trashing that stuff.
Throughout discovery, you may choose to build small things that help
you learn—specifically, UI or architectural prototypes.
Spike is a term used for bits of development or research we do with
the explicit goal of learning. It’s a term that came from the Extreme
Programming community to describe work that may not yield soft‐
ware we choose to ship. Use stories to describe spikes that get your
team building something to learn.
After you’re confident you’ve got that small subset of stories you
should build and release to customers and users, then it’s time to move
them forward into delivery. That subset of stories that leads to a val‐
uable product release is what I refer to as a release backlog.

## Dive into the Details of Each Story During Delivery

Our opportunities may have started as big rocks. Discovery conver‐
sations broke them down and separated the rock from the precious
metals. But delivery will move fastest and most effectively if we can
keep breaking down those pieces into the smallest parts possible—
keeping in mind that every part still needs to be something we can
build and learn from. It’s going to take a lot more conversations that
dive into a lot more depth to do that.
I picture a cool rock-breaking machine: on one side I load these big,
rough rocks that contain all those precious metals, and then the other
side spits out small, just-right-sized rocks ready to go into the next
development cycle. I’m going to label this machine the story workshop
machine, and its name describes exactly what we’ll do.
We’ll use deep-dive discussions with developers and testers, and ev‐
eryone else on the team who’ll build the software, to really dig into the
details. These are our "last best conversations"—the conversations
where we really need to agree on confirmation, or the acceptance cri‐
teria for the small parts of software we build—because the next step is
building them. Since we know that it’s conversations that break up
software, we’ll use these conversations to get our stories into the right
size and shape to put into the next development sprint, or iteration.

* Use deep-dive story workshops to discuss the details, break down stories, and really agree on specifically what we’ll build. *

I like to call these last best story conversations story workshops be‐
cause everyone knows that meetings are unproductive, but workshops
are for getting work done. They can happen as needed, almost every
day. Sometimes they happen all at once during a planning session. In
the Agile process Scrum, they may happen during what’s called a
backlog grooming or backlog refinement session. Whatever you call
these discussions, have them.

## Keep Talking as You Build

The story workshop machine feeds the next in line—the Agile delivery
machine. And here’s where I picture the Agile delivery machine really
kicking in. In one side we put these small, regular-sized stories, and
out the other side comes a polished, working bit of software—or what‐
ever it is that your story described making.
No matter how hard you try, even your last best story conversations
won’t have predicted everything you’ll learn once you start to build.
Plan to have lots of frequent, ad hoc story conversations every day.
Bring up the need for them in your daily standup meetings.
If you’re a developer and the details you trapped in story discussions
aren’t enough to answer questions you have now, jump up and find
someone to talk with to continue your discussion. You can’t blame bad
requirements here. Remember that, before you started, you worked
with others to identify all you’d need to know to build. But we’re all
human. It’s OK to miss some things.
If you’re a product owner, UX designer, business analyst, or one of the
other folks who helped decide what to build, don’t be afraid to get up
from your desk to see how development is going. I promise that once
you see something working, you’ll see something useful. And, more
than likely, the person getting it working could use a little feedback.

* Use conversations as you build to fill in details and give feedback on what’s being built. *

## Evaluate Each Piece

When those finished bits of working software roll out of the Agile
delivery machine, it’s time for the people who helped describe what to
build, and the people who build it, to pause and look closely at what
we built.
Remember, these aren’t really machines. And you and the people you
work with aren’t cogs in a machine. And all those pieces you just turned
out aren’t exactly the same widget. They’re all different.
Stop and really look at the quality of the solution built. Reflect on how
effectively you planned. Did you really finish what you expected? Did
it take a lot longer? Shorter? Or about what you imagined? And really
talk about how well the "machine" is working. It’s time to make ad‐
justments or changes to the way you work to get better-quality stuff
out more predictably.

* Frequently reflect on product quality, your plans, and the way you work. *

This first pass at evaluation in Scrum is called a sprint review and ret‐
rospective. Whatever you call these times to stop, review, and reflect,
make sure you have them.

## Evaluate with Users and Customers

Remember that what you’re building wasn’t for you—at least not usu‐
ally. You’ll need to get it in front of users and customers to see how
they feel about it. For some of these folks, all they’ll have seen is a
prototype, or a wireframe, or a textual description. Seeing and
touching something working really lets them evaluate whether or not
they’ve got the right thing.
But each of these little pieces that came out of the Agile delivery ma‐
chine may not be enough for them to tell. In my mental model I picture
each of those pieces piling up on a scale. It’s one of those old-style scales
with a counterweight on the other side. On my counterweight is the
word Enough; that is, enough to test with users and customers and for
them and us to learn something.
Usually enough means a whole screen, or a flow of screens, that allows
users to complete a task or reach a meaningful goal. And I don’t want
to do a show and tell with users. I’m not looking for them to say, "That’s
great." I’m looking to learn—and learning usually takes the form of
"That’s not quite right" and "Now that I really use it, it would be better
if…"

* Learn by testing meaningful chunks of working software with customers and users. *

## Evaluate with Business Stakeholders

There are likely others in your organization who have a vested interest
in the software you’re building. They may not be the people who’ll use
it every day, but they’re concerned that the software is going to be
delivered to those people as soon as possible—or at least when you
said it would be.
Use a review to show them the product so far. Use the review to talk
about where you are in relationship to your bigger plan. Remember:
they likely aren’t interested in whether you meet your plan for the
bunch of single, small parts you built. What they’re interested in is
progress on the minimum viable solution—because that’s the smallest
part we could release and really get some value from in the outside
world. So speak to that. Share with them the results from tests you’ve
done with users or customers. They’ll be interested in learning that,
too.

* Keep your progress and quality visible to stakeholders inside your organization. *

## Release and Keep Evaluating

I picture one last scale at the end of all this. On this scale I pile up the
parts we’ve reviewed together, tested with customers and users, and
made visible to stakeholders in my company. Coincidentally, this scale
is very similar to the one that we used a couple of steps ago—evaluate
with users and customers. As with this other scale, on the counter‐
weight it says Enough—but this time it means enough to release to
those customers and users to produce the outcome I’m looking for.
When that scale balances, release it to customers and users.
But don’t stop there. You’ve still got something to learn. If you were
like Eric in Chapter 3, learning was your primary goal, so you’ll need
to use metrics to learn if and how people use your product. You’ll need
to use face-to-face conversations to learn why they do or don’t use it.
If you predicted that people would be using your product, and they
and your company would be benefiting from it, don’t just assume that.
Use metrics and conversations to really learn what’s happening.

* Use metrics and face time with users to really learn if your target outcomes were met. *

If this were a project, you’d be done—because you shipped it. But you
just made something. It’s a product. And a product’s life starts when
it’s delivered. When you start paying attention to what people are doing
with your product, I promise you’ll find opportunities to improve it.
Write those down, and feed them back into the beginning of this
model.
That’s the real circle of life—or at least, the life of a story.
And that’s a lot of rock breaking. So exactly who is supposed to do all
that rock breaking? I’m glad you asked, because that’s what the next
chapter is about.