# Rock Breakers

## Introduction

There’s a nasty misassumption in common Agile practice: that there’s
a single person responsible for writing stories and conducting all these
story conversations. In the Agile process Scrum, that person is called
the product owner. There are two big reasons, however, why this logic
doesn’t work, and probably a lot of smaller reasons, too.
Big reason #1
  There are too many conversations to have to move a story along
  its journey from vague idea to small, specific things to build. One
  person isn’t enough to cover all these conversations. And, if you
  set up your process so that one person has to be there, you’ll
  quickly see what a bottleneck that person can be, and likely will
  become.
Big reason #2
  One person can’t come into the conversation with the expertise
  and diverse viewpoints it takes to arrive at a best solution. It takes
  the collaboration of people with different skills to really arrive at
  best solutions.

* Requiring a single product owner to write all of the stories and be present for all story conversations doesn’t work. *

Don’t get me wrong here. In my vision of good product development,
the product owner is a critical leader. He keeps the product and whole
team focused on moving the same direction.
The alternative is design by committee—a seriously bad anti-pattern
where everyone gets an equal say in what we do. In a committee, when
we only have time and resources to do one thing, we compromise. My
ex-wife and I would often do this when choosing a restaurant. She
wanted seafood, and I wanted Mexican food, and we’d settle on some‐
thing neither of us liked. When a committee isn’t constrained by time
and resources, we do it all. You’ve used software products like this: the
product with more features than anyone can count, and where your
biggest problem is finding the feature or remembering how to use it.
Effective product owners surround themselves with the people they
need to make good decisions. They incorporate the expertise and
opinions of many. But, in the end, when resources are constrained or
the success of the product is at stake, they must make decisions. And
there’s always someone who’ll be unhappy with that decision. My
friend Leisa Reichelt puts it well: "Design by community is not design
by committee…design is never democratic."1

## Valuable-Usable-Feasible

In his book Inspired: How to Create Products Customers Love (SVPG
Press), Marty Cagan describes the responsibility of a product manager
to identify a product that’s valuable, usable, and feasible. When I first
read these words, I pictured in my head a simple Venn diagram where
the solution we want is an intersection of what’s valuable to our com‐
pany and our customers, usable by its users, and feasible to build given
the time and the tools we have.
But what may not be dead obvious here is that, to really identify the
solution in the center of that sweet spot will take collaboration between
people who understand our business, our customers, our users, and
the technology we use—and not just understand those things, but take
responsibility for the success of the solution. These people actually
speak with stakeholders, customers, and users; they actually design
and test user interfaces; they actually design and test the code that
makes the product work.
Remember that misconception in Agile development where a single
product owner or product manager decides what to build? It’s rare if
not impossible for a single person to possess the business, user inter‐
face design, and engineering skills necessary to find that valuableusable-feasible sweet spot. That’s why the most effective organizations
use small, cross-functional discovery teams that work together to find
that right solution. As we discussed in the preceding chapter, think of
discovery as rock-breaking work. It’s the work we do to move a story
from a big vague idea to something small and specific we can build.

* A small, cross-functional team led by a product owner orchestrates product discovery work. *

The ideal size for the team is two to four people—dinner-conversationsized so the members can quickly build shared understanding.
This team should be led by a product owner or product manager who
has deep understanding of her business’s vision and strategy, and of
the market her product serves. This core team includes someone who
understands users, is comfortable working with them to learn about
the way they work, and can sketch and create simple UI prototypes. It
also includes a senior engineer from the team who’ll build the product.
This person needs to understand the current architecture of the system
and have insight into newer engineering approaches that could be used
to solve tough problems. The real secret here is that the most innova‐
tive solutions often come from the engineer supplied with insight
about the business problem and the users' problems.
A cohesive discovery team is a powerful, fast-moving group of experts
who can find problems and validate solutions quickly. I often hear the
term triad used to describe this core team. On my recent visit to
Sydney-based Atlassian, Sherif, whom you met in Chapter 8, pointed
to three seats close together. He explained, "This is where the triad sits."
The area around the triad was filled with desks and computers where
the rest of the team sat. I hear the term triad used when there are two
people, four people, or even more on the discovery team, since it’s the
three concerns—valuable, usable, and feasible—we’re talking about,
not three bodies.

* Support product owners with a core team that includes user experience, design expertise, and technical expertise. *

## A Discovery Team Needs Lots of Others to Succeed

An effective discovery coordinates collaboration with not only the
development team, but also business stakeholders, subject matter ex‐
perts, customers, and end users. It’s tough work that requires topnotch communication and facilitation skills, in addition to the specific
expertise each team member brings in.
Now, here’s the real secret. For a product of any significance, it’ll take
a team to get it built. To keep the vision of the product clear, ensure
the solution the team builds is cohesive, and help keep everyone mov‐
ing in the same direction, a good product leader is critical. The best of
these leaders focus on helping everyone take ownership. In a healthy
story-driven environment, you’ll see lots of story conversations going
on all the time. And many of them won’t need the product leader there.

## The Three Amigos

¡Three Amigos! is the name of a mediocre 1986 western comedy star‐
ring Steve Martin, Chevy Chase, and Martin Short. What does this
film have to do with Agile software development and stories? There’s
a more tactical triad of collaborators that’s valuable during story work‐
shops. And I’m not sure who originally gave them the moniker "the
three amigos," but it appears to have stuck.2
(I’m sure if more people
had seen the movie, it wouldn’t have.)
You might recall that story workshops is the term I give to that last best
conversation where we decide specifically what to build. It’s here where
the three amigos come in.
During this last best conversation, we really need to consider lots of
details and alternatives for implementation, so we’ll need a developer
from the team who’ll build the software—ideally, one of the developers
who will actually work on it.
For this small piece of software to be considered done, it’ll need to be
tested, so we’ll need a tester in the conversation. A tester—the first
amigo—will often bring a critical eye into the discussion, spotting
things that might go wrong sooner than most. The tester is often the
best at playing the "What-About" game.
And, of course, we’ll need someone who understands what we’re
building, who it’s for, and why we’re building it, so we’ll need a member
of that core product discovery team. That person is the second amigo.
At this stage we’re often not introducing a new feature idea. We likely
already did that back in discovery. Now we’ve more or less committed
to build something, so it’s important to understand specifically how
that software should look and behave. So often the person involved in
this conversation is a user experience designer or business analyst
who’s worked through those details. This is your third amigo.
This group will work through the details and agree on specific accept‐
ance criteria for the story. It’s out of this conversation that we’ll have
our best estimate of how long it will take to build and test the software.
And it’s often in this conversation that we’ll make decisions to split the
story into smaller, "right-sized" development stories—those stories
that take one to three days to build and test.
Story conversations happen continuously as we move ideas through
software development. In every conversation, keep what’s valuable,
what’s usable, and what’s feasible in the discussion. Include people who
can speak to those things. Avoid design by committee by holding a
product owner responsible for a successful, cohesive product.

### [The Client-Vendor Anti-Pattern]

There’s a nasty anti-pattern that gets in the way of using stories well.
In fact, it can get in the way of people working together to do any‐
thing well. It’s the dreaded client-vendor anti-pattern.
In this anti-pattern, one person in a conversation takes the client role,
while the other takes the vendor role. It’s the client’s job to know what
he wants, and to explain the details to the vendor. That’s what we call
"requirements." It’s the vendor’s job to listen, understand, and then
think through a technical approach for delivering what the client
asked for. The vendor then gives her estimate—which in software
lingo actually means "commitment," and is the reason why developers
often fear giving estimates without thorough investigation.
The rest of the story is sadly predictable.
Every once in a while, the estimate is deadly accurate, and the client
gets what he wanted, and what he wanted actually turns out to be what
he needs.
But, most of the time, constructing a solution takes longer than the
vendor predicted. The person in the vendor role can cite all sorts of
excuses for the delay, including lack of details in the requirements she
was given, or just "bad requirements." The client can blame inaccurate
estimation—which no one seems to notice is an oxymoron. When the
solution is delivered, and the person in the client role receives what
he asked for, he then gets an opportunity to use it and realize it’s not
what he needs. He doesn’t get the outcome he imagined he would.
The real tragedy here is that the person in the client role understands
his problem better than he’s able to predict what will solve it. And the
person who understands the technology is often the most qualified
to solve the problem because she knows how the technology she’s
working with can help. What’s more, most technologists honestly
want to help. They want to know the things they’re building are put
to good use.
But, in the client-vendor anti-pattern, conversations about problems
and solutions are replaced by discussions and agreements about re‐
quirements. No one wins.
One of the goals of stories is to break this anti-pattern.
One kind of relationship many of us have that does break this antipattern when it goes well is the one we have with our doctor. Try
showing up at your doctor’s office and giving her your "requirements."
Tell her the prescriptions you’d like written and the operations you’d
like scheduled. If she’s nice, she’ll smile and say, "That’s interesting;
tell me where it hurts."
In my head, I picture a continuum where on one side is the word
waiter, and on the other is the word doctor. Try to make your working
relationships much more like a good doctor-patient relationship, and
much less like a waiter-diner’s.

## Product Owner as Producer

If you work in a more traditional IT setting, the notion of a product
owner may seem confusing. For example, if you help build critical
systems for a bank, the bank knows its real products are the banking
services it sells to its customers. If there is a person with the official
title of "product manager," it’ll be his job to look after a specific type
of bank account or credit product. The computer systems that support
that service offering are just a piece of the puzzle. And often that same
IT infrastructure supports lots of different banking products. Under‐
standably, the bank doesn’t see that infrastructure as a product, and
there’s often no one who owns it.
In these types of organizations, business analysts (BAs) are often
placed in a "requirements gathering" role. They’ll act as an interme‐
diary between the developers and the business stakeholders like the
product manager of a banking or insurance product. When those
businesspeople need changes to the IT infrastructure that supports
their product, they’ll work with the BA to describe those changes. And
here’s where they might take on the client role as the BA acts in a vendor
role, and that’s where the anti-pattern kicks in.
In casual conversation, my friend David Hussman gave me a better
metaphor for the relationship the BA should have with his business
stakeholders—the same relationship that a music producer has with a
band. This makes sense coming from David, who’s both an Agile guru
and ex-guitarist for the 1980s heavy metal band Slave Raider. He’s
worked with producers, and been a producer himself. In that rela‐
tionship the band comes to the music business with passion, and
hopefully some talent, but they don’t know the music business or the
mechanics of recording an album. The producer does, however. It’s
the producer’s job to help that band make the most successful record‐
ing it can. Successful producers can turn raw talent into a polished,
commercially viable recording artist.
As a business analyst in an IT context, that’s your job. Take the vision
of your business stakeholders and help them make it a success. You
can’t be just an order taker—you’ll need to behave more like a doctor.
And sometimes this means telling your stakeholders things they don’t
want to hear. But, if you’re sincere about helping them succeed, they’ll
see it and value your help.

* When acting as product owner for other stakeholders' ideas, take on the role of a producer who helps them succeed. *

One potential anti-pattern is to make the business stakeholder take on
the product ownership role. I say potential because it can work if the
businessperson has lots of help and support from other team mem‐
bers, an aspiration to learn how to do the job of a product owner, and
the time it’ll take to do it. Product ownership isn’t a trivial responsi‐
bility, and shouldn’t be treated as something that could be done in your
spare time. Instead of forcing another job on businesspeople, I’d rec‐
ommend you find them a producer to help them succeed.

## This Is Complicated

For an idea that at its core is simple, this whole story thing has gotten
terribly messy. If anyone told you software development—or any
product development, for that matter—was easy, they were lying.
Stories are many things at once. We’ll use the word to refer to the card,
to the chunk of software we build, and especially to the kind of con‐
versations we have to make decisions about what we should build.
Stories can describe very large opportunities, or the almost insignifi‐
cant deliverable pieces that by themselves aren’t necessarily meaning‐
ful to customers and users. Working with stories is a continuous pro‐
cess of conversation and discussion to break them down from big
things to small things. And through all those conversations, we’re
keeping not only what we could build in focus, but for whom, and why.
Story mapping is just one of the ways to help us break big things down
while keeping the focus of the conversation on the people using your
product and what makes them successful.
If this is all starting to make sense, then you’ve made that big, necessary
mindshift. It’s not a shift to use stories to document requirements, but
a shift toward working with people more effectively, and together fo‐
cusing on solving real problems with the products you create.
And that, I hope you’ll agree, is a beautiful thing.