# Start with Opportunities

## Introduction

Let me point out again how stories are like rocks. And like a rock, when
you break it into smaller parts, you can call those parts "rocks" too—
just smaller rocks. But there’s always that first rock. That’s the one we’ll
need to look closely at to decide if it’s worth breaking up or not. Let’s
call it "rock zero." And in our flow of stories, I’ll call that an
opportunity.
I’m using opportunity for ideas that we believe will solve a problem.
I’m not just a glass-half-full guy. It’s just that it’s a bad idea to consider
every idea as something we need to include in our product, because
you know that there isn’t enough time and people to build all that stuff.
And, even if you did have the time and people, your customers would
be overwhelmed.

## Have Conversations About Opportunities

When we come up with ideas, these ideas are often pretty big—but
not always. In story lingo, you could call them epics, but I prefer to call
them opportunities. No matter what you call them, they’re still stories,
and the goal of the first conversations we have about them is to decide
whether to move forward with them, or trash them. For each one of
these opportunities, we can discuss:

Who they’re for
  At this level, it’s often different groups of users, customers, or a
  target market.
What problems we’re solving
  For each type of user, we can talk about what problems we’re solv‐
  ing for them. We’ll need to talk about how they solve their prob‐
  lems today by using manual tools, our competitors' products, or
  worse, our product that’s causing them pain today.
What we’re imagining
  We may have some ideas about what the product or feature should
  be. We should discuss those ideas.
Why
  It’s a good time to discuss why it benefits our organization to build
  software for these users. Solving users' problems usually isn’t
  enough. We also need to consider the ultimate return on this soft‐
  ware investment and whether this investment is aligned with our
  current business strategy. I’m not saying we need to calculate re‐
  turn on investment (ROI), because anyone who can do that at this
  stage is likely full of something other than just stories. Just discuss
  in general terms how we imagine it’ll benefit our organization if
  we build it.
Size
  At this level, even when they’re big, we can start to give some gut
  estimate of development time, although it won’t be very accu‐
  rate. It works best to look at the opportunity and compare it to
  something you’ve already done: "That sounds like it will be about
  like this other feature we put in the last release. That took a couple
  of weeks, so this may take about the same amount of time." To
  help decide if we should proceed with discussion on this idea, it’s
  valuable to know if we’re talking about something that’ll take days,
  weeks, or months to build.

The whole stack of these stories is what I call an opportunity backlog.
We aren’t sure yet if we should build them, or at least we shouldn’t be.
Remember, there are always more ideas for things to build than we’ll
have time for. Find the opportunities aligned with your organization’s
business strategy and that solve problems for customers and users that
are compelling. Have enough discussions to make a go/no-go decision.

## Dig Deeper, Trash It, or Think About It

"Go" doesn’t mean "We’re gonna build this thing," it means we’ll move
the opportunity forward into deeper discovery discussion. During
discovery, it’ll take a lot more discussion—probably with others not
in the room. If this is a new feature or an entirely new product, it’ll
take diving a lot deeper into customers and users and how they solve
their problems today. Ideally, we’ll talk to them directly. It’ll take ex‐
ploring and prototyping different solutions. It’ll take lots of deeper
discussions in light of what you and your team learn to make a decision
about what specifically you’ll need to build to be valuable to customers,
users, and your organization. And, after all that work, you still might
decide to kill the idea.
"No-go" is a great result of an opportunity discussion. Remember,
there’s always more to build than there is time. If the opportunity
doesn’t look promising based on your discussion, trash it now. It may
be a good idea to involve the people who championed the idea in the
discussion so hopefully they come to the same conclusion.
Your group may not have enough information to make either a go or
a no-go decision. If that’s the case, make a list of what you need to
learn, and together get to work getting the information you need.
If you still can’t make a go or no-go decision, you can always put it
back into the opportunity backlog to discuss later. That’s called pro‐
crastination, and I do it a lot.

### [The Opportunity Canvas]

When looking at product opportunities, I’ve used Marty Cagan’s Op‐
portunity Assessment template as my starting point. Recently, I’ve
really come to like using a canvas-driven approach. The canvas ap‐
proach to looking at business models, as described in Alexander Os‐
terwalder and Yves Pigneur’s book Business Model Generation (Wi‐
ley), is an effective way for groups to work together to size up a startup
business. But for me, and most of the people I work with, we’re not
looking at starting a new business or launching a new product. We’re
often looking at adding a next important feature to the product we
have. That shouldn’t stop you from using a similar canvas approach
to sizing up product opportunities, however.
A canvas organizes information spatially. It’s big and all in one place
so a group can see and work with it, which is hard to do in a slide or
printed document, and the organization allows you to see dependen‐
cies. Information is adjacent to other information it depends on.
A canvas looks like this:
And working together to gather information in a canvas format looks
like this:
Using a canvas approach has real benefits like:
• You can see the important concerns of an opportunity in a single
view.
• You can see the relationships between these concerns.
• Building shared understanding, ownership, and alignment by
working together collaboratively to create a canvas leverages ev‐
eryone’s contribution.
As a product discovery team, initially fill out the canvas based on what
you understand today. Involve stakeholders, subject matter experts,
or anyone else you think can bring important information into the
conversation.
Use sticky notes to make it easy to change your mind as discussion
progresses. Iteratively improve the canvas as you learn more.
You could proceed through the canvas starting with the first box, and
continue to the ninth. However, if you don’t have good answers for a
box, record what you do know, or your assumptions now, and
proceed.
Fill Out the Canvas in One Flow, and Read It in Another
The boxes in the canvas are numbered in a logical order you can use
for discussing an opportunity. But, if you’re sharing the canvas with
someone else, you may want to read it left to right, and top to bottom.
You’ll notice the left-to-right flow is from "now" to "later" in the output
versus outcome model introduced earlier. You’ll also notice that top
to bottom moves from user needs to business needs.
This isn’t a form to fill out. This is instead a set of topics to discuss
and iteratively refine your understanding of. Remember: "design by
community isn’t design by committee." Involving lots of folks helps
everyone learn faster, but ultimately, the go/no-go decision to proceed
with an opportunity falls to the product owner. The best product
owners leverage their teams to help make the decision, and usually
find that they and their teams are in agreement.
Here’s the flow of spaces in the Opportunity Canvas.
1. Problems or Solutions
Ideally, we should start with a clear problem we’re trying to solve.
However, the world is rarely ideal. We’re often given a feature or en‐
hancement idea and then need to work backward to understand the
problem. Start with what you have.
Solution ideas
List product, feature, or enhancement ideas that solve problems
for your target audience.
Problems
What problems do prospective users and customers have today
that your solution addresses?
If you’re building a product for entertainment like a game or tool to
share fun stuff on a social network, they may not have a real "problem"
to solve, just a desire to be entertained.
2. Users and Customers
What types of users and customers have the challenges your solution
addresses? Look for differences in users' goals or uses that would affect
their use of the product. Separate users and customers into types based
on those differences. It’s a bad idea to target "everyone" with your
product.
3. Solutions Today
How do users address their problems today? List competitive prod‐
ucts or workarounds your users have for meeting their needs.
4. User Value
If your target audience has your solution, how can they do things
differently as a consequence? And how will that benefit them?
5. User Metrics
What user behaviors can you measure that will indicate that they
adopt, use, and place value in your solution?
6. Adoption Strategy
How will customers and users discover and adopt your solution?
7. Business Problem
What problem for your business does building this product, feature,
or enhancement solve for your business?
8. Business Metrics
What business performance metrics will be affected by the success of
this solution? These metrics are often a consequence of users chang‐
ing their behavior.
9. Budget
How much money and/or development would you budget to discov‐
er, build, and refine this solution?

## Opportunity Shouldn’t Be a Euphemism

I know your company probably doesn’t use opportunities. In fact, if
your company is anything like those I’ve worked with, you’ve got a
roadmap filled with stuff you’re supposed to build. You may even think
of them as your "requirements." Making a no-go decision on any of
that stuff may not be your call. The truth is, we really shouldn’t turn
all those clever ideas into software, no matter the job title of the person
with the clever idea.
Use this first big story conversation to frame the work you and your
team may be getting into. Even though the answer to the go/no-go
question may be "Go," make sure you leave the conversation with
shared understanding about the problems you’re solving, for whom,
and how your organization benefits from building software.
If it’s not your decision, or anyone on your team’s decision, to go ahead
with this opportunity, then make sure you include those in the
conversation who can make that decision. If they’re not available, have
the conversation anyway, and make assumptions about who, what, and
why. Then share those assumptions with decision makers. I promise
you that they’ll correct you if you’ve got it wrong. Discussing those
corrections will start the right conversation.

## Story Mapping and Opportunities

As much as I like story maps, I wouldn’t use a map to manage oppor‐
tunities. Those opportunities are usually bigger chunks. And discus‐
sion about these big rocks usually drives toward the details we’ll need
in order to decide about moving them into deeper discovery.
But one thing that story maps are great at is giving you a really effective
way to step back and look at the big picture for the product you have
now. Use a map you create for your product today to find opportuni‐
ties, or to consider the opportunities you already have in the context
of your product today.
Try building a simple, very high-level map of your existing product.
This is a "now" map similar to the one you built in Chapter 5 about
starting your morning. (You did build it, didn’t you?) These types of
maps have been around in various forms for a while. They’re often
called journey maps. To make one for your current product’s experi‐
ence, just map the flow users take through the major activities they
engage in. Use this map to give context to your opportunities. To do
this, add each opportunity into the body of the map. Use a different
color of sticky note or index card to clearly call them out. What you
might see are opportunity "hot spots"—places in your users' flow
where there’s a higher density of ideas and likely pain from your users.
Look at the users engaged in each activity, and the frequency of that
activity. Opportunities that affect high-frequency activities engaged in
by critical users are likely opportunities you should be focusing on—
sooner rather than later.
You can use this same map to add in cards for the things users complain
about today. To balance things, look at the parts of the product that
they love today, and add in those joys. If you find places where there’s
lots of pain for users, but you haven’t yet identified any opportunities,
you probably should.

### [Journey Mapping and Concept Generation]

Ben Crothers, Atlassian
Given that we offer over 10 different products, we have to make sure
that we design, build, and improve upon those products in ways that
match how our customers use them together, not one by one. As part
of a project to discover how the products could work together in a
better way, we formed a multidisciplinary team to map the entire endto-end customer experience in finding, evaluating, purchasing, and
using them, as well as getting help and adding more products and
services.
This was huge. To help break it down, we mapped the experience at
a high level first, and then broke into subgroups to expand on each
section of that skeleton journey. We did this by initially filling a wall
with the moments, actions, and questions that customers go through,
color-coding as we went, and then going back over it, adding pain
points, opportunities, and assumptions.
We gained a lot of insight by being able to trace an end-to-end story
rather than just a feature-based experience. We quickly realized, for
example, that some parts of the experience—such as setting up prod‐
ucts or getting help—weren’t isolated to one part of a linear journey,
and needed to be catered for much more and in greater detail.
Various other stakeholders and teams were brought in to flesh out
more detailed journeys that were all pegged to various points along
the high-level skeleton journey, so that we captured and validated as
much existing knowledge as we could.
Then we went absolutely nuts coming up with as many concepts as
we could to improve upon and reinvent various parts of the detailed
journeys. All of the concepts were distilled and written up on cards,
and stuck on the wall in loose order along the journey.
Each team member explained each of his or her concepts, after which
we all voted on the concepts' effectiveness with sticky dots, according
to their feasibility, viability, and desirability.
We were then able to craft an overall cross-product vision of an ideal
customer experience, based on these journeys and validated concepts.
The journey was also brought to life with a 20-page comic, which
transformed the journey—and all the personas, scenarios, and con‐
cepts involved—into a single storyboard that made it easier to com‐
municate to the whole organization. This informs many product en‐
hancements that continue today.
What’s really compelling for us is that many of those involved in de‐
veloping and refining these enhancements now were also involved in
generating the concepts to start with. Even though this exercise was
done over eight months ago, that shared concepting and understand‐
ing makes things so much more efficient now.

### [Challenging Assumptions with Rehearsal Remapping]

Erin Beierwaltes and Aaron White
1. One Map to Rule Them All
After customer visits, interviews, and explorations, the project owner
had a journey map that he confidently believed covered the path to
the best outcome for the customer. Business as usual for many teams.
Now it was time to share with more people and get it going.
2. Question Everything
But after a few conversations, we started to question what we had
missed. What simple assumptions had we made that could have bigger
than expected impact? We needed a quick way to challenge our as‐
sumptions, find holes, and build shared understanding among ev‐
eryone who would be a part of the project.
3. Set the Scene
We gathered the team, assigned personas (there were multiple), and
described the desired outcomes that would naturally guide those per‐
sonas to use the part of the product that would test our assumptions.
We did not write step-by-step instructions. Our direction: "Simply, as
this person, you would like to accomplish this goal." Rehearsal!
4. Rehearsal
While the actors played their parts and tried to reach their described
goals, a few observers played the part of the silent audience.
The PO observed what paths were taken, answering a few questions,
and avoiding leading anyone down a particular path. The IxD ob‐
served behaviors, comments, and reactions.
5. Rebuild the Map
We didn’t show the original map, but instead walked all of the actors
through building a new map that described how they accomplished
their goals, sharing along the way how some took different paths.
6. Pains and Gains
After the rebuild, we asked each actor to share pains (things that
challenged, frustrated, or confused them) and gains (things they
thought were slick, cool, or intuitive). A real sense of new empathy,
understanding, and excitement filled the conversation.
7. Observations
Finally, it was the audience’s turn to ask questions about interesting
behaviors they had seen. We were amazed at how many things the
actors were unaware they had done, but that gave us a window into
how someone might naturally try to accomplish something
8. Profit!!!
After only 2.5 hours, we had built shared understanding about the
real feel of the new solution in a way only a conversation could have.
Actors spoke with real empathy for the customers they played, and
the discovery team had gained huge insights into what was working
and where more experiments might be required.

## Be Picky

You’re not helping anyone if you agree to take on everything. Aggres‐
sively trash opportunities that don’t offer much hope of creating the
outcomes you hope for. Work with business stakeholders to do this so
they can help make those decisions.
If you’ve made a go-forward decision, it’s time to roll up your sleeves
and get to work. And that’s what the next chapter is about.