# Using Discovery to Build Shared Understanding

## Introduction

When I see simple models that describe Agile development, they often
start on the left side with a big list—the product backlog. Now, I’d con‐
sider that funny if I didn’t know that some people consider it that easy.
Getting a good actionable product backlog out of an opportunity is
going to take a lot of hard work; it won’t simply materialize for you.
And it definitely isn’t the result of capturing a list of things people want
built. It’s a deliberate process of discovery that initially focuses on
learning a lot more about who, what, and why.

## Discovery Isn’t About Building Software

Discovery work isn’t about building shippable software. It’s about
learning. It’s about building a deeper understanding of what we could
build. It’s about asking and answering questions like:
• What problems are we really solving?
• What solutions could be valuable to our organization and to cus‐
tomers buying or adopting the product?
• What does a usable solution look like?
• What’s feasible to build given the time and tools that we have?
It’s asking and starting to answer all these questions about an oppor‐
tunity that starts your first round of rock breaking. All the details about
the product or feature you discuss become the titles of smaller stories.
And each of those smaller stories can result in even deeper discussions,
and still smaller stories.
All these discovery discussions don’t just result in more stories. Re‐
member that story discussions involve creating lots of other simple
models that represent what we understand. We’ll need these other
simple models to build shared understanding.

* If the only thing you create while making sense of a big, ambiguous opportunity is smaller stories, then you’re probably doing it wrong. *

## Four Essential Steps to Discovery

If I’ve got a big idea, or even a small one that needs some clarity, I
follow this progression of discussions to move from the big idea to the
details I’ll need to best understand if we’ve got a solution worth
building:
1. Frame the idea from a business perspective.
2. Understand customers and users and how you’re helping them.
3. Envision your solution.
4. Minimize and plan to identify the smallest viable solution and how
you’ll build it.

### 1. Frame the Idea

If you really use an opportunity backlog, and really had an opportunity
discussion to make your decision to begin discovery, then you’re most
of the way there. Use framing discussions to kick off focused discovery.
Involve the people who’ll work together to better understand this
opportunity.
Use framing discussions to set bounds for the work you’re doing. If
you’re clear on why you’re building something and who it’s for, you
and your team will be better able to stop discussions about solutions
that don’t solve the problem you’re focusing on, or aren’t for the users
you’ve targeted.

### 2. Understand Customers and Users

Use discussions about customers and users to gain more insight into
the people your product or features are for, and how they benefit them.
Involve those who have deep user understanding, and others who need
to get it.

#### Sketch simple personas

I like creating simple persona sketches with a small discovery team
to build shared understanding of my users. A persona is an example
of your target user assembled from the facts and sometimes the as‐
sumptions you have about your users. Building personas helps us look
at the software through the eyes of our users. Personas are handy tools.
I built this simple persona with a group at Mano a Mano, a nonprofit
group that helps people in Bolivia by doing everything from building
roads to supporting education and healthcare. Our discussion this day
was about small, Internet-savvy donors—the sort of people who may
not have a huge amount of money, but want what they do have to give
to be used wisely. We’d expect people like Chuck to find Mano a Mano
on the Web or hear about it via Twitter or Facebook.
We created this persona together as a group using flipchart paper. It’s
a fast, fun activity with lots of people shouting and contributing
information.
Now, if you’re an experienced UX designer who’s created personas
before, you may be feeling a little sick to your stomach right now. For
the rest of you reading, good personas are built from good data gath‐
ered through solid research. UX people concerned about that might
be nervous about team members just shouting stuff out and scribbling
it on flipchart paper. It doesn’t sound rigorous. So don’t just shout your
guesses. Discuss what you know and what you’ve observed. Tell stories.
Involve people in the discussion who have firsthand experience with
users. If you’ve done lots of research, bring it into the discussion with
you. Identify the details most relevant to the opportunity you’re build‐
ing and put those into the persona. Filter out the noise. When you’re
done, have an honest discussion about how much of this is just a guess.
"We already have personas created. They’re beautiful documents we’ve
posted on the wall." I hear that a lot. But be honest with yourself. Most
people haven’t read them, have they? And half of the people who did
read them did so just to poke fun at them. Maybe I’m being cynical,
but I see that a lot.
Build personas together, collaboratively. Do this to build shared un‐
derstanding with the team about who’ll build the product. Do this to
really consider the most relevant aspects of the persona.

* Build lightweight personas together to build shared understanding and empathy within the team. *

I create simple personas for each type of user who might use the feature
we’re discussing. If I’m moving fast, I may just list different types of
users or roles using the software, and note a few details about them.
Remember Gary in Chapter 1? One of the piles of cards right next to
Gary was exactly that—a list of users and a few bullets of relevant
information about them.

#### Create organizational profiles or orgzonas

If you’re building a product that organizations might buy—for exam‐
ple, an accounting product—take the time to list different types of
organizations and record some details about them. These are your
customers—the people with cash in hand who need to get some value
from your product. An organization type with some supporting details
is often called an organizational profile. My friend Lane Halley first
introduced me to creating example organizational profiles much like
you’d create a persona. For fun, she called them orgzonas.

#### Map how users work today

You can go one step deeper and map the way your users work today
without your product, or with your current product. If you were play‐
ing along in Chapter 5, you built a story map about the way you do
things today. Doing this for the way your users work today will help
your discovery team really understand the problems they’re solving
These photos from Duncan Brown of the Caplin Group show some‐
thing they call a narrative journey map. It’s a map that tells a story
about the "now" side of the "now-and-later" model I started this book
with. It doesn’t describe our great solution; it describes the way people
reach their goals today—faults and all.
The body of the map contains facts, observations, pains, and joys.
When you map what you understand now, you’ll see "hot spots"—areas
in the flow where there are lots of problems. You’ll also find rewards
—the joys at the end of a set of steps that make your users' efforts
worthwhile. You can build valuable products by taking away pains, or
magnifying joys. Use this map as a springboard for brainstorming
solutions, or for validating that the solution you have in mind really
does solve problems.

### 3. Envision Your Solution

By now you’ve framed to be clear on why you’re building this from a
business perspective; you’ve dived deeper into users and customers so
you know what their world looks like now. It’s time to imagine the
future—to envision the solution and how your target customers and
users will make use of it.

#### Map your solution

This is where story maps shine, at least for me. I use the story map to
imagine the life of my users with the solution we’re building in place.
Both Gary and the Globo.com team in the first two chapters built maps
like this. As we discussed in the opening chapters, the steps people
take in the story you tell form the left-to-right flow. Remember from
Chapter 4 that those are user tasks—short verb phrases that, when read
from left to right, tell the story. The finer-grained tasks and other de‐
tails stack up vertically under each step. If it’s a long story, distill groups
of activities to create a three-level map.

#### Words and pictures

Have you ever been in a situation where you describe a product idea
to a developer, and are pleasantly surprised when he says, "Oh, that’s
simple. It shouldn’t take long to build." But, then when you really get
going on it and start building it, you realize the developer was imag‐
ining something far simpler than you were. For example, you might
have described a site to sell your stuff online. You might have been
imagining something like eBay or Amazon Marketplace. But the de‐
veloper was imagining something more like Craigslist, and that’s why
you were pleased with the estimate. I’ve learned over the last decade
that words alone just aren’t enough.

* Visualize your user interface to build shared understanding of the solution. *

If you’ve got UX designers on your team, now’s a good time for them
to start sketching. Sketch individual screens and post them above the
map in the order they appear. You’ll end up with something that looks
like a storyboard.

##### [Visualizing the Whole Experience]
  Josh Seiden, with artwork by Demian Repucci
  One day I received a call from Robert, a recently hired design manager
  at a large, well-funded education startup. The company was in the
  early stages of a big project, it was hiring rapidly, and it was on a tight
  deadline to produce a huge system. Just one problem: it was having
  trouble figuring out how to approach the enormous design challenge
  it was facing. Could I help?
  When I arrived in the office a few days later, Robert—both proud and
  overwhelmed—showed me around. The company had hired a large
  consulting firm to help it develop requirements for its project, and
  that firm had done an impressive amount of work. Every wall in the
  light-filled loft offices was covered with brown butcher paper, and
  each one of those sheets was in turn covered with index cards and
  Post-it notes: requirements, in the form of user stories. Thousands of
  them. As Robert walked me past the walls of stories, I noticed that all
  the stories were organized by functional module: a text editor wall, a
  grading application. And curriculum modules: a wall of science, a wall
  of English. I struggled to build a picture of the system in my mind.
  Robert was in the process of building a design team, and also trying
  to segment the problem. As we talked through what his team needed,
  we realized we could use a story map to help organize the thousands
  of user stories in a way that would help the design and development
  teams operate from a shared vision.
  Coincidentally, a few weeks earlier, I had sat in on a workshop facili‐
  tated by a team of storyboard artists. The goal of the workshop was
  to help entrepreneurs articulate a vision for their business ideas.
  Working quickly, these artists sat with the entrepreneurs, drawing
  their stories out of them and sketching out the ideas as storyboards
  —mini comic books that told each story with great clarity. I decided
  I wanted to combine this approach with story mapping, and called
  one of the artists who had impressed me in that workshop, Demian
  Repucci.
  Over the next few weeks, Demian and I met with Robert and his team,
  as well as with the product managers of the various pieces of the sys‐
  tem. Our focus was on high-level workflow—the major use cases in
  the system. As we met, Demian sketched in his notebook and I used
  index cards and Post-it notes to outline the use cases on the confer‐
  ence room walls. After the meetings, Demian would return to his
  studio to illustrate key moments, and I used Omnigraffle to produce
  clean versions of the story maps that we had drafted in our meetings.
  With Robert, we decided that the most valuable thing we could deliver
  was the organizing structure for the team, so we produced a series of
  posters that could be printed on 11×17 paper and taped to the walls
  to form the "spine" of the story map. The teams could then use that
  independently to organize their user stories in a new way. Instead of
  a module-centric view that doesn’t lend itself to iterative development,
  we now had a usage-centric approach that could be sliced into crossmodule releases.

One approach to envisioning the user experience that involves the
whole team is a Design Studio approach. A Design Studio is a fast,
simple, and collaborative way to involve a large group in deliberate
ideation, which is a flashy word for coming up with lots of possible
ideas. What you’ll quickly learn is that no single person has the best
ideas. Rather, the best ideas are often a combination of several people’s
ideas along with more discussion to build on them. A Design Studio
(and simple ideation, for that matter) is the opposite of what most
folks, including me, often do: go with the first idea that seems like it’ll
work. I first saw Design Studio described by Jeff White and Jim Un‐
ger and wondered why I hadn’t always been doing it. I’ve done these
involving development teams, stakeholders, and even customers and
end users.
Whatever approach you use, combine ideas, refine them, and come to
a shared understanding of what the software could look like.
An uncomfortable thing that happens here is that visualizing your
solution will help you catch things you’ve missed in the map. You’ll
find you may need to add, change, or reorganize the map to support
what you’ve visualized. Don’t worry: that’s a good thing.

##### [Design Studio Recipe]
  A Design Studio is a quick, collaborative approach to ideation. There
  are lots of ways to do this right, but here’s my simple recipe:
  1. Invite a group of people whose opinions and ideas you’d like, and
  whose buy-in and understanding you’ll need to build the prod‐
  uct. Eight to twelve people is a good number.
  2. Describe the problem you’re solving. Review the work you did to
  frame the opportunity. Review personas and any "now" maps that
  describe how people work today. Review any solution maps you
  may have started, but be wary of saying too much. If they anchor
  their ideas on yours, you may be missing out on some of their
  great ideas.
  3. Optionally share examples and inspiration. Discuss and show
  other similar products that are good examples. Discuss and show
  products that may not be the same, but that have good ideas in
  them that could be leveraged.
  4. Everyone sketch! Give everyone paper, pens, maybe some sketch‐
  ing templates, and a fixed amount of time. I see as little as 5 mi‐
  nutes, and as much as 60. I like using 15 minutes.
  5. In small groups, share ideas. I like doing this in groups of 4, so if
  you had 12 people, break that into three groups of 4. Person-byperson, share your best idea. Team members give feedback.
  Coach participants to give feedback on how well the solutions
  address the problem, not on how much they like them. Coach
  them to build on others' ideas. Continue person-by-person for a
  fixed time-box—30 minutes usually works for me.
  6. Ask each group to consolidate their best ideas into a single sketch‐
  ed solution. This is the hardest part. Take 15–30 minutes for this.
  7. Ask each group to share their best, consolidated ideas with the
  whole group. Discuss these.
  8. Thank everyone, and gather up the sketches and ideas. You, your
  UX designer, or your core discovery team will need to leverage
  them to create a final, best, consolidated UI sketch. Remember,
  in the words of my friend Leisa Reichelt, "design by community
  is not design by committee." You’ll have lots of good competing
  ideas here, and someone’s got to make the tough call.

#### Validate completeness

One of the things our heads are good at is filling in details. For example,
when we see two frames of a comic strip, our brains fill in what hap‐
pened in between. This is a cool trick for comic books, novels, and
movies. But, when thinking through what software does, we’ll often
imagine the interesting features while neglecting the necessary stuff
that happens in between. Overextending the movie metaphor, it’s sort
of like talking only about the car chases and gunfights, and leaving out
the story that explains why all that action took place.
Telling the full breadth of your users' stories using a map helps you
remember to talk about those critical details in between. You’ll usually
see that the really cool feature you were thinking of needed some set‐
ting up by the user early in the story, and resulted in some changes to
reports and notifications later in the story. There may even be conse‐
quences for others of your new feature idea. For example, adminis‐
trators may need to manage security concerns, or managers may like
oversight on how the feature is being used by their staff.

#### Validate engineering concerns

Back to the filmmaking metaphor, if you are going to move on to make
this movie, you’ll need to start thinking about how and where you’ll
film it. You’ll need to consider the kinds of special effects you’ll need.
At some point you’ll need to go deeper than the story and consider the
technical details of making your movie.
A story map of your software is helpful for the same kind of discussion
you’d have making a movie. Discuss your solution map with engineers
and architects before getting too far along. Seeing the big picture helps
them think through bigger engineering constraints that could result
in hopelessly flawed solutions. They can give you early warning that
your solution may sound cool, but it’s not feasible to build given your
current architecture and time budget. They can often suggest alter‐
native ways of doing things that’ll give your users an equivalent expe‐
rience, but be more cost effective to build.
These engineers for a large insurance company have been talking in
front of this map for a long time. During the course of their conver‐
sation, they’ve found a snag in this big map about their product. The
business rules engine in their product needs to change. Seeing the big
picture helped them visualize and directly confront the complexity.
They’ll use that knowledge to talk about what they can plan to do early
to help mitigate risks.

#### Play "What-About"

You’ve imagined the solution from a user’s perspective, and visualized
the user experience. Take some time to discuss what’s going on un‐
derneath the user interface. Talk about tough business rules, complex
data validation, and nasty backend systems or services you’ll need to
connect with. Add stories into the map that name these parts. Or make
sure you make notes on the stories you have.
It’s a good time to review what you’ve got with lots of other people as
well. Share what you and your group have come up with. I promise
you’ll get people who ask lots of questions that start with "What
about…" I love these people, although not always when they’re right
in front of me. But I love that they’re helping me think of the tough
stuff before I stumble on it later, when it’ll be even more painful to
learn.
The movie metaphor really works for me here. If I were going to make
a movie, I’d want a screenplay and a storyboard—the sketches of key
scenes that help me imagine the movie. If I were investing in a movie,
I’d need to see at least that to get a clear picture of what the writers and
directors were envisioning. If I liked the movie at this point, I’m going
to need to learn a bit more about how much it costs, and how feasible
it is to produce.
I’d hope they’d use those sketches to think more deeply about the
movie. I’d want to know that they’d considered how many locations
we’d need to film in and what they looked like. I’d want to know that
they’d considered what kinds of sets, props, and special effects we’d
need. As the important Hollywood investor, I’d need the screenplay,
the storyboard, and lots of other details that supported a rough plan
and an estimate. We’d need this so we could set a budget and a timeline
for making the movie.
This is the sort of stuff you need before you start building your
solution.

##### [Ideas, Examples, and Journeys]
David Hussman, DevJam
Many people overcomplicate the discovery process, but it can be quite
simple and still remain powerful. Step past the mythical certainty of
"requirements," and take a moment to explore the discovery of ideas
using examples and journeys as your guide.
• Use the following simple guide: 1) suggest a product idea to ex‐
plore, 2) select people you think will benefit from the idea, 3)
create a collection of examples of them using the product idea,
and 4) use those examples to create a map and the journeys you
think they should take. Remember that as the product creator,
you’ve taken on the onus of creating meaningful experiences and
not just more features.
• Ideas do not need to be brilliant. Of course you want a great
product, but often ideas deemed to be brilliant don’t pan out,
while others—which don’t shine so brightly—grow in brilliance
as you explore their use in the context of someone trying to ac‐
complish something of meaning.
• Selecting passengers is not rocket science. Don’t overcomplicate
the selection. If you are unsure where to start, simply make a list
of the people you think will benefit from your ideas. Frame them
in a humane way so they come to life and stay alive in the mouths
and minds of the product development community. After you
have worked them a bit, select someone to work with and don’t
worry if it’s the right person. Be ready to learn from exploring,
and avoid worrying whether or not your selection is right—it
probably is not.
• Create a varied list of examples. This is where many people lose
control and accidentally stumble into complexity. Start with a
simple or obvious example; the more concrete, the better. Then
come up with a complex example, and don’t fear setting the bar
high. You are creating a range of constraints, you are not prom‐
ising anyone the world. Again, make the complex example spe‐
cific. If you’re looking for how specific you should be, and you
are courageous, replace the work example with a test, and you’ll
be one step closer to an automated validation vehicle.
• Add a handful more examples that fit between the obvious and the
complex, and then start simple. Tell the story of the passenger
using the simple example as your guide. Tell it to someone else,
and have that person help you capture the stories on the journey.
Where are your users when they start? What triggers them to
engage? What do they do, specifically? How does it end? Use the
various examples to explore the various journeys for your
passengers.
• Choose the journeys that will help you learn. Worrying about
where to start is yet another complexity well. Walk the map, se‐
lecting journeys that you think will teach you the most about your
audience and their needs. Again, if you’re worried that you are
not making the right selection, you may be right. The best way
to find out, and the best investment in learning, is to select a few
journeys, build them, and watch people use them—in person or
via real-time analytics.
• Avoid the trap of product arrogance. The difference between what
you think people need and what they really need is the realm of
product arrogance. Using the process laid out here, you can more
quickly get to learning in context by building and validating one
journey at a time.

#### Don’t celebrate yet

By this step in the discovery flow, you should have begun to describe
your solution’s parts as individual stories. Each piece is a part of the
big opportunity. If you’re like me, you’ve used a story map to organize
all the parts. If you’re smarter than me, you’ll have invented an even
better way to organize all the parts—and if that’s the case, you should
get in touch right away. If you’re a little dim, you’ll just have a big pile.
Or even worse, someone may have written a big long requirements
document that obfuscates all you’ve learned. Please don’t do that.
Whatever you end up with here, you’re at the point where lots of people
celebrate because they’ve "finished the requirements." Don’t be those
people. You’ve got a last and most important step to do.

### 4. Minimize and Plan

You’ve envisioned a solution with words and pictures, at this point,
your team may be feeling pretty proud. But one of the big problems
with discovery happens when we all work together to identify a fab‐
ulous solution with lots of bells and whistles that we all love.
I know what you’re thinking. Why would that be a problem?
The problem usually comes in when we focus on making everyone
happy, and at the same time fail to focus on small, specific target out‐
comes. The result is a solution that’s much bigger than it needs to be.
Remember, our goal is to minimize the amount we build (our output)
and maximize the benefit we get from doing it (the outcomes and
impact). Your opportunity will break into lots of possible smaller sto‐
ries. We certainly wouldn’t build them all. That wouldn’t be minimiz‐
ing output, would it?

* If you’re not cutting away more ideas than you keep, you’re probably not doing discovery work right. *

#### There’s always too much

I’m sorry, but there is. If you’ve been involved with software develop‐
ment for any length of time, you likely already know this. I’ve tried for
many years, over a decade really, to pretend it’s not true. I’ve given up
on that. You should, too. But don’t worry: you’ve got some tools that’ll
help you identify something feasible to build given the time and people
you have.
In Chapter 3, you read about Globo.com’s approach to using a map to
confront a tough deadline. The company focused on that deadline,
embraced it, and identified an outcome that would let it be successful.
Then it sliced up its backlog; that is, it cut away all the stories that
weren’t necessary for it to reach that outcome. This was its minimal
viable solution hypothesis. And it wasn’t just a crappy, half-baked ver‐
sion of the big idea—it was a really great version that was sharply
focused on being successful for the Brazilian elections. The Globo folks
believed it would be valuable to their business, their advertisers, TV
networks, and their users. They’d thought about all their users, and
were pretty confident they had a usable solution. And by slicing their
map, they’d found a solution that was feasible to build given the time
and teams they had. That intersection of valuable, usable, and feasible
for a specific target set of customers, users, and uses is a viable solution.

* Viable means successful for a specific business strategy, target customers, and users. *

We can think past that first viable release to second and third viable
releases, too. But we know that once that first release goes live, the
world will have changed, and that’s good. But it’ll also mean we’ll need
to rethink the future releases in light of the new world we’ve created.

#### The secret to prioritization

Step in close, because I’m going to whisper this.
Not many people know this—or at least they behave like they don’t.
Maybe they’re just playing dumb to throw people off.
If you’ve hung around in Agile development for a while you might
have heard the phrase "prioritize stories by business value." The state‐
ment is true, sort of, but where you see the words "business value,"
you’re supposed to fill that in with something specific. This is where
you and your discovery team need to say specifically what is of value.
Let’s look at Mad Mimi again. Gary needed to find a product that would
be viable in a specific market soon, before he ran out of money. Via‐
ble for Gary meant he had an audience that liked the product and
would pay for it. And he could begin to grow the product’s audience
and the revenue he earned as a consequence.
It’s that business goal combined with financial constraints that re‐
quired Gary to focus on specific users and user activities he’d support.
Gary still had high hopes of creating the "music industry marketing
interface" that gave Mimi her name. But he decided to focus first on
the band manager promoting his band using direct email marketing
to his fans. After he did that, the specific functionality he needed to
focus on became clear.
If you were listening closely just now, you caught the secret to
prioritization.
Specific business outcomes drive focus on specific users, their goals,
and the activities they’ll engage in with your product. Focus on those
activities drives focus on the specific features and functionality users
will need to be successful.
For Mad Mimi, Gary made a deliberate decision to focus on delighting
band managers promoting their bands. That’s the specific value he
chose to focus on. He didn’t use that ambiguous term "business value."
He filled in that blank with what was of value to him.
The prioritization error that most people make is to try to prioritize
features first.

* Prioritize specific business goals, customers, and users, and then their goals, before prioritizing features. *

The next time you catch someone asking which feature is higher pri‐
ority without discussing business goals, target users, and their use,
that’s your cue to start asking questions. Try not to act too smug. Not
everyone knows this secret.

## Discovery Activities, Discussions, and Artifacts

There are a lot of activities and artifacts you and your team can create
during discovery. Here’s a quick table that’ll give you some basic start‐
ing points for the kinds of things you could do. Don’t do all these
things, because it’s likely too much. And don’t do just these things,
because there are likely equivalent or even better practices that suit
your skills and context. But definitely don’t just sit in a room and write
lots of stories. That’d be crazy.

### Frame the idea

Use these discussions to review
why your business is building the
software, who it’s for, and how
you’ll measure success.

• Named business problems you're addressing
• Specific business metrics affected
• Short lists of specific customers and users
• Metrics that will allow us to measure whether people use
and like this new feature
• Big risks and assumptions
• Discussions with business stakeholders and subject matter experts

### Understand customers and users

Use discussions and research to
understand customers and users,
their needs, and how they work
today.

• Lists of user roles and descriptions
• Simple user profiles or person sketches
• Simple organizational profiles or orgzonas
• Story maps about how people do things today—also
known as journey maps
• User research andobservation tofill in what wedon'tknow

### Envision solutions

Focus on specific customers and
users, and then envision solutions
that will help them. Visualize
solutions with wordsandpictures.
Validate those solutions with
customers and users.

• Story maps
• Use cases and user scenarios
• UI sketches and storyboards
• UI prototypes
• Architectural and technical design sketches
• Architectural or technical prototypes
• Lotsofcollaborationwith teammembers,users,customers,
stakeholders, and subject matter experts

### Minimize and plan

Identify what you believe is a small, viable solution.
Estimate well enough to set a budget for delivering the
solution. Create a plan for development that will
minimize risk.

• Story maps used for slicing
• Estimation used for setting a development budget

## Discovery Is for Building Shared Understanding

Do you recall working on a software project where no one quite un‐
derstood the big picture? Do you recall a time when the team learned
halfway through development about a big chunk of work they hadn’t
planned on? Often, when this stuff has happened to me in the past,
we’ll find that between all of us in the team, and the outside people we
collaborate with, we had the answers. We could have easily foreseen
problems we ran into if we’d have just gotten on the same page.
Gary’s story in Chapter 1 is a bit about Gary and his delivery team not
having shared understanding of the big picture. Even Gary—the guy
who held the vision of the product in his head—didn’t have a clear
understanding of the size and complexity of his product. Visualizing
his product as a bunch of simple models helped him and everyone he
was relying on get the same big picture in their minds.
For some things you build, it may be enough to just get everyone on
the same page about who your customers and users are, and the big
picture of the solution you have in mind for them. But I need to warn
you, your hypothesis about what you’re building is probably wrong.
Don’t worry: there are a couple of strategies I want to tell you about
that really make discovery practice work. And that’s what the next
chapter is about.