# Using Discovery for Validated Learning


## Introduction

I’ve misled you. Sort of.
Some of you may have been reading the last chapter, and other chapters
before that, and you’ve been slowly reaching a boiling point because
you know what I’m leaving out. Sorry about that.
The stories I told about MadMimi.com and Globo.com are both in‐
complete. The truth is that both of them used discovery conversations
to identify what they believed was a minimum viable solution. But
whether those solutions were actually viable or not was just a guess.
In fact, all this stuff is a guess until we actually ship and observe what
the market—our customer and users—actually does. Initial discovery
conversations, along with story maps, helped them get to a good start‐
ing guess. But, for both of them, it marked the beginning of a much
longer journey to really discover a viable product.
This leads me to one of the biggest mistakes people make, and that’s
actually believing their minimal viable solution will be successful.

## We’re Wrong Most of the Time

I’m as guilty as the next guy in believing my great ideas will be suc‐
cessful. The truth is that in the past I released lots of solutions I thought
would be wildly successful, but they just weren’t. They weren’t dismal
failures, either—they just didn’t make much of a difference. When this
happened I, and my company, learned to look the other way. It wasn’t
just me. We all thought the features we were adding would be valuable.
But in the end we’d added a feature a few people used, but most didn’t,
and we knew we’d end up supporting for the life of our product.
My belief, not rooted in any formal scientific research or studies, but
just in my own failures and what I observe working with other com‐
panies, is that very little of what we build is successful or has the real
impact we hope for. I figure around 20 percent max. Then there is
another 20 percent of things we do that are genuine failures—solutions
that result in a negative impact. I’ve seen a variety of organizations that
release a new, better version of their website and see sales decrease, or
release a new version of their product that customers try and then
demand the old version back. That’s the kind of failure I’m talking
about.
But it’s that 60 percent in the middle, give or take, that is neither success
nor failure that’s the big problem. This is the stuff that we spend val‐
uable development money creating, and in the end wish we hadn’t.
Research from the Standish Group published in historic "Chaos" re‐
ports explains that between 64 and 75 percent of features are rarely or
never used.1
 And, depending on the source you look at, 75–90 percent
of all software startups fail.
All this is pretty disappointing when you think about it. No wonder
just pretending it’s working is the strategy of choice for most
organizations.

## The Bad Old Days

In the bad old days, I used to work a bit like this. I’d come up with a
great idea, or in reality, someone else like my CEO or a key customer
handed me their great idea. I’d get to work making sense of it and
fleshing it out. Then my team and I would build it. It always took twice
as long as we expected, but that’s a problem to deal with in later chap‐
ters. We’d finish. We’d ship. We’d celebrate. Sometimes we celebrated,
then shipped. But either way, we were done.
But then stuff actually started to happen. What usually happened was
people complaining about what we’d delivered not working the way
they wanted. Sometimes they didn’t complain at all (which we’d find
out later was a side effect of no one really using it). We’d then spend a
lot of time pretending we were successful. For some of you, that might
describe the way your company works today. And I’ll be honest with
you: it’s still the way I often fall back into working. Don’t tell anyone.
I’m supposed to be an expert.
But there are better alternatives.

## Empathize, Focus, Ideate, Prototype, Test

Years ago, a potential client contacted me and asked me if I could help
it adopt a process called design thinking. This client had been using a
typical Agile process, and was doing it really well—"well" in that it was
delivering predictably and with high quality. But it had learned that
"the faster you deliver crap, the more crap you get." That’s a little harsh
sounding. To put it another way, the client had learned that there was
little correlation between the quantity of software it built, and the out‐
come and impact it got from it.
When this client called, I was known for my specialty in user experi‐
ence design and Agile development. I thought to myself: "I’m a de‐
signer, and I’m thinking, so I must be design thinking." But I was
wrong. That’s not what the client meant. Luckily for me, I didn’t say
what I was thinking out loud.
Design thinking refers to a way of working originally described by a
company called IDEO, and then later described and taught by Stanford
University’s d.school. These days, it’s taught in a number of universities
and used in lots of companies worldwide.
A design thinking process has several steps that, as I explain them,
seem like obviously good ideas. But, in practice, what I and most peo‐
ple tend to do is the exact opposite. No wonder things go bad so often.
The first step of a design thinking approach is empathize. It’s not called
research, which I’d normally expect from a design process. It’s called
empathize because a critical outcome of doing the work is to under‐
stand how it really feels to be a user of your product. To do this you
need to go to where users are, meet them, watch them work, and ideally
work alongside them. Now, of course, if you build software for sur‐
geons, no one expects you to become an amateur surgeon. But do your
best to understand what it’s like to walk in their shoes. It’s important
to remember that out of traditional research, especially the quantita‐
tive hands-off stuff, we get data and not always empathy.

* Talk directly to customers and users. Experience the challenges you’re helping them with firsthand. *

The next step is called define. From the work we do during empathize,
we learn a lot. But we need to make sense of it—to build shared
understanding. And we’ll do this using lots of collaboration to tell
stories, share, and distill what we’ve learned. Then we’ll choose specific
people and problems on which to focus.
Use story maps here to map the way people do things today. Include
in them details of what you saw and learned. Focus on the pain points
users have, and the rewards they seek. Use simple personas to build a
good example user that synthesizes what you’ve learned. Choose spe‐
cific problems to focus on.

* Really focus on one or a few problems. State them specifically. *

The next step is ideation. If you were paying close attention in the last
chapter, we talked about a simple practice called design studio. It’s an
example of a good ideation approach. In common business practice
where the first person to come up with a viable idea is the winner, it
seems a waste of time to come up with lots of possible ideas. If you
remember that your first obvious solutions are, well, obvious, then if
really coming up with an innovative solution is important, think past
that.
I like using a story map as a backdrop for ideation. Use a map that
shows pains, joys, and other information about users, and then
brainstorm ideas directly into it. Write solution ideas directly on cards
or stickies and inject them into the map where the solution is most
relevant.

* Deliberately come up with multiple possible solutions to customer and user problems. *

The next step is to prototype. Now, we likely all know what prototypes
are, but we often neglect creating them in the rush to get working
products built. It’s a pity, really. Small investments in simple paper
prototypes help us think through our solution. They help us begin to
experience it ourselves. Building simple prototypes out of paper, or
the simplest of prototyping tools, helps us filter out a lot of ideas that
just won’t work. Beginning to simulate the actual act of using a product
helps you continue to ideate—to come up with ideas to make the sol‐
ution even better.

* Build simple prototypes to explore your best solutions. Advance prototypes to a level of fidelity that allows users and customers to evaluate whether the solution really solves their problem. *

The last step is to test. By that I don’t mean check to see whether there
are bugs. I mean learn whether your solution really does solve some‐
one’s problem. You might be surprised that it could do that even with
bugs. When you’ve got a prototype that you believe solves the prob‐
lems you’ve chosen to focus on, put that prototype in front of people
who’ll use your product. This isn’t exactly "show and tell." And it’s
definitely not selling. Potential users need to recognize the prototype
as something they could use to solve one of their problems. They need
to use it to accomplish a real task. You can actually accomplish this by
faking a lot of it.

* Get your solutions in front of the people who will buy or use your product. Don’t expect them to be a success at first. Iterate and improve them. *

In addition to those five steps, part of design thinking is a way of
working that emphasizes small, multidisciplinary collaborative teams
working together quickly using simple models, sketching, and lowfidelity ways of documenting and communicating. You should recog‐
nize that as the discovery team and other collaborators I described in
Chapter 12. You should recognize their way of working as one that
emphasizes building shared understanding.
Using elements of design thinking helps us really understand the
problems we’re solving, so we don’t solve problems we imagine people
have. Prototyping and testing solutions before we invest big in build‐
ing full-featured scalable solutions helps us validate that we’re building
solutions people really value and can use.
But design thinking alone can lead to some problems.

## How to Mess Up a Good Thing

Design processes have been around a long time. Design thinking as a
generalized approach to design has, too. And a design process done
well can be a huge improvement over the bad old days. But don’t con‐
fuse process with skill. There are some predictable ways that design
processes fail. If you’ve seen a good design process take way too much
time and result in a bad outcome, then you might believe these sorts
of processes don’t work. It’s not the process.
Here are a few great ways to mess up a design process:
• Start without framing the business needs and target customer
well. This’ll make it hard to prioritize who to focus on, and hard
to tell if you’re finding a good solution.
• Spend a lot of time doing thorough research and making sense of
what you’ve learned. You’ll never run out of things to learn—so
why stop? Time-boxing might have been a good idea.
• Don’t spend any time at all talking to people and learning from
them. After all, we’ve got a lot of data, and really, our solution ideas
are great. We just need to get going on designing them.
• Fail to focus on specific problem, and instead try to solve lots of
problems for lots of people. The more problems you solve the
better, right? Except that big problems often result in big solutions.
And trying to solve a problem for people with conflicting needs
can result in a solution neither person likes.
• Consider multiple solutions, but only ask real designers to con‐
tribute solution ideas, because they’re the only ones trained to
have good ideas.
• Don’t waste time considering multiple solutions, because the idea
we have is so good.
• Beautifully craft a prototype that really looks real, but doesn’t work
well enough for customers and users to really use it. After all, when
they see it, they tell us it "looks really lovely."
• Convince yourself and then others that this well-researched, pro‐
fessionally designed solution will work. After all, you’ve followed
a rigorous design process. What could go wrong?
• Don’t worry about how much it’ll cost to build. It’s the right sol‐
ution, and any cost to build it is justified.
• When you deliver the solution to customers and users, and don’t
see the outcomes you expect, find the breakdown in the process
that’s at fault. Or better yet, find a person or group you can blame.
I’m being a bit snarky here, I know. But I’m a strong advocate for using
design processes. And, oddly, I find I’m often the one complaining
about them. I can also say that I’ve been guilty of almost all the failures
listed. But, over the past few years, I’ve found a twist on typical design
approaches that improves them.

## Short Validated Learning Loops

Eric Ries is the author of a book called The Lean Startup (Crown Busi‐
ness). In his book Eric describes how he fell into the trap I described
earlier as the "bad old days." As the CTO of a startup, he helped his
company build what they believed to be a successful product. Only
their target customers and users didn’t see it that way. In fact, they
mostly responded with a mixture of pleasant feedback, bad feedback,
and outright apathy. Definitely not the outcome and impact they were
looking for.
One of Eric’s company advisors was Steve Blank. Steve had written a
book called The Four Steps to Epiphany (K&S Ranch) in which he
asserted that the first thing you need to develop isn’t a product, it’s
customers. He described a process for progressively validating that
you’ve found customers who are interested in a solution, and for then
validating that the solutions you have in mind are the solutions they’ll
buy, use, and tell others about. Blank referred to this as a validated
learning process.
Eric Ries’s biggest contribution to product development is simplifying
and "productizing" that thinking into this simple mantra: buildmeasure-learn. Eric emphasized reducing the time it takes to get
through this simple learning cycle. One of the biggest flaws in tradi‐
tional design processes is spending a very long time learning and de‐
signing—so long that you become very attached to the solutions, and
then failing to validate that those solutions really do bring about the
outcomes you intended. Where a typical design process may take
weeks or months to validate a solution idea, a Lean Startup process
usually takes just days.

### [What’s in a Name]

  I need to tell you that I love most things about Lean Startup think‐
  ing. But one thing I don’t love is the name. It’s not all that Lean, and
  the concepts are way too important to just be used by startups.
  Lean refers to the use of Lean thinking and principles as described by
  the Toyota Processing System decades ago, and Lean thinking as it’s
  popularly used in lots of other contexts now, including software de‐
  velopment. There are tons of good ideas to be found in Lean thinking,
  and Lean Startup only scratches the surface.
  Eric tries to make the case that startups exist inside even the largest
  of businesses, that there are contexts of high risk and uncertainty that
  call for startup thinking. But it’s my belief that if you catch yourself
  saying, "There’s not much risk or uncertainty in this project," you need
  to remember that those are famous last words. There’s always some
  amount of risk, and the learning strategies described in a Lean Startup
  process are pretty useful in most contexts. There’s no need to try to
  justify to yourself or others that you need to behave like a startup.

## How Lean Startup Thinking Changes Product Design

In the bad old days, we’d have come up with a big idea, built it, and
hoped for the best.
If we were trying to break out of that trap using a rigorous design
process, we’d have done our best to set aside our great ideas, and then
dig deep into research to understand the problems we’re solving.
Here’s how I recommend we do things today, using Lean Startup
thinking.

### Start by Guessing

Yes, guessing.
In the bad old days, you’d have guessed and pretended you weren’t. In
a design process, you’d not have allowed yourself to guess. You would
have anyway. But you’d have pretended you weren’t. So just stop
pretending.
It’s actually not just guessing. It’s a mixture of passion, experience, and
insight—along with a fair dose of guessing—that gets the ball rolling.
I take my assumptions and guesses about who my users are, usually
by sketching simple prototypes. I’ll describe how I think they work
today by building simple "now" story maps. I’ll do this collaboratively
with other people who have firsthand experience with users and cus‐
tomers. And, in some situations I’ll do this involving customers and
users directly. So, in fact, many of our team’s guesses aren’t guesses at
all. But it’s not exactly research like we used to do, either. We’ll spend
hours to a couple of days doing stuff like this—never weeks or months.
After we’ve all got shared understanding about who will use the soft‐
ware and some focus in the problems we’re solving, we then guess at
the solution. We’ll use principles of design thinking—deliberately
coming up with and considering multiple solutions. But we’ll try to
converge quickly on what we think our best solution is. Sometimes
we’ll fail to decide on a single solution, and pick a couple. We don’t
wring our hands about this too much, because we know we’re probably
wrong anyway.

### Name Your Risky Assumptions

Since we may have guessed a lot about our users and their challenges
today, we’ll name those guesses. Specifically, we’ll work together to
write a bulleted list of the things we believe are true, but if we find they
aren’t, then we’ll need to rethink everything.
We’ll do the same with our solution. We’ll think about how we believe
people will respond to it and how they’d use it. We’ll form a hypothesis
in our minds about how we think they’ll behave with our solution.
We’ll also discuss technical risks—things that would threaten the fea‐
sibility of our solution.
Given a list of risks and assumptions about our customers, our users,
and our solution, we’ll identify what we think the few biggest risks are.

### Design and Build a Small Test

Here’s where things get really different.
In the bad old days, we’d have planned and built a whole product. In
a design process, we’d have prototyped a whole product, or most of it
anyway. But using a Lean Startup approach, where our goal is to learn
something as quickly as possible, we’ll do our best to make the smallest
prototype possible. In lots of cases, it’ll be hard to call it a prototype at
all.
Here’s an example from my friends at a nonprofit organization called
ITHAKA. They make a product called JSTOR. If you’ve been enrolled
in a US college in the last decade, you likely used JSTOR in your college
library to find articles and books for a paper you had to write.
The students using the product wanted to easily use it from anywhere
—at coffee shops, or at home, or when they traveled. But getting to
JSTOR from outside the college could be a challenge for students. It
required them to set up a username and password with their college
so when they were sitting in a coffee shop, they could log in and get
access to all the resources their university had licensed. The JSTOR
team already had a solution, but it was a bit tricky to use. They wanted
to test a new way of doing things.
They had these assumptions about those students:
• Worked from coffee shops and dorm rooms
• Didn’t know they could access JSTOR from those locations
• Or, if they did know, they thought it was difficult
They had these assumptions about their solution:
• Would be easy to learn
• Would be obvious to students that they were getting full access to
JSTOR without being at their library
To test their assumptions, the JSTOR team didn’t need to build soft‐
ware—not yet. They needed to talk to students specifically about where
they were when they were doing research, especially when they were
using JSTOR. The team needed to confirm that students had the chal‐
lenges that they imagined, and, given that, that students thought
JSTOR’s solution idea would address those challenges.
The team planned on talking to lots of students. And, to make it easier
and more consistent to describe the problem and their solution to
students, they created a simple design comic. If you haven’t seen one,
a design comic is exactly what it sounds like. It looks like a few pages
from a comic book. But, instead of showing superheroes battling su‐
pervillains, it shows real people solving a real problem with your sol‐
ution idea.
Here are a few pages from JSTOR’s design comic (reproduced courtesy
of ITHAKA, © 2014 ITHAKA, all rights reserved):
The test the team designed required that they spend a little time in‐
terviewing students to learn about their challenges today. And then,
they’d review the scenario with the students to see if their solution
looked like it would address the students' challenges. They didn’t build
a full prototype. They did have concerns that their solution would be
really usable, and they couldn’t learn that from a comic book. They
also had a few technical concerns that would require writing some
prototype code to test. But none of that mattered if students didn’t have
the problem, and didn’t respond well to their idea.
That smallest possible solution to test is what Lean Startup refers to as
a minimum viable product. Yes, Eric Ries knows it’s not a whole prod‐
uct. But, when your goal is learning, it is the smallest product you could
build to learn.

### Measure by Running Your Test with Customers and Users

Put the test in front of customers and users. In early work this usually
means schedule interviews and spend time with people. If you’re cre‐
ating a consumer solution, you can do customer intercepts, which is a
technical way of saying go to where your customers and users are, stop
them, and talk to them. I’ve tagged along with people I work with as
they go to shopping malls, coffee shops, and tourist attractions.
JSTOR recruited students and grad students and spent 30–60 minutes
talking with them first to interview and learn how they did things today
so the team could confirm their assumptions about the problems they
were solving. Then they stepped students through the design comic
to get their response to the solution idea.

### Rethink Your Solution and Your Assumptions

After running your test a few times, you’ll begin to get predictable
results. If you’re dead wrong, you’ll often learn that pretty quickly. Take
back what you’ve learned. Roll those facts back into what you thought
you knew about your users, and the way they work today. Use that to
rethink your solution. Then, rethink your assumptions about users
and solutions. Then design your next test.
After the JSTOR folks ran their tests, they learned that some students
didn’t have the problems they thought they did. Normally this would
be disappointing news, because we all hate being wrong. But, in a Lean
Startup approach, this is excellent news. It’s excellent because they
found they were wrong after a couple of days of thinking and working,
as opposed to finding out after weeks of a team building software.
If you’re using this sort of approach, your biggest challenge will be to
learn to celebrate what you’re learning as opposed to worrying about
being wrong.

* In a Lean Startup approach, failing to learn is frequently the biggest failure. *

In a Lean Startup approach, build means build the smallest possible
experiment you can. Measure may be analytics gathered from working
software, direct observations from interviews and face-to-face testing
of prototypes, or both. Learning is what we do with the information.
It’s the rethinking of our assumptions and reforming what we believe
to be a best solution going forward.

## Stories and Story Maps?

You might be asking, "Where are the stories and story maps in all this?"
And you’d be right to ask.
Throughout a validated learning approach, you’ll be constantly telling
stories about who your users are, what they’re doing, and why. You’ll
use story maps to tell bigger stories about how people work today, and
how you imagine they’ll use your solution. When it comes time to
build prototypes, you’ll use stories and story conversations to agree
specifically on what the prototype you’re building should look like,
and what you’ll check to confirm the prototype is done. After you
understand that stories are a way of working, you’ll find it’s difficult
to tell when you are or aren’t using them.
There is one big difference in the way we use stories during discovery,
though. Usually when we’re using them, we’re talking with developers,
testers, and lots of others about the software we intend to build and
put into production. We’ll work pretty hard to make sure we’ve got
shared understanding. We’ll get into a lot of details about how we’ll
build the software so we can learn enough to predictably estimate how
long it’ll take. Usually we’ll talk about a number of stories so we can
agree on how much we can get done in a two-week sprint or iteration.
But the way we’re working during discovery is faster. We hope to build
simple prototypes in hours, not days. Even the prototypes we build
using code and live data we hope will take days, not weeks. We’re
building to learn, and we expect most of our ideas to fail, or at mini‐
mum, need some adjustment to be successful. So we focus on working
together quickly, agreeing quickly, and minimizing the formality.
During discovery and validated learning, you may be telling stories
constantly, breaking ideas and work down into small buildable pieces,
and agreeing on exactly what to build. You’ll be doing it so fast that it
won’t be clear you’re using stories. But you are.