# Refine, Define, and Build

## Introduction

So, now what? If stories are for planning and facilitating discussions
in order to build software, all we seem to be doing is lots of talking.

## Cards, Conversation, More Cards, More Conversations…

Your first bunch of conversations helped you make sense of an op‐
portunity. You talked about who’d be using your product, and imag‐
ined how they’d use it to accomplish something valuable to them. Your
conversations went deep enough to break the big opportunity into
parts that were small enough that you could tell which parts were im‐
portant to be in a next product release, and which didn’t matter so
much. You collected the stories that described that next viable release
into a release backlog.
If you’re clever, and I know you are, your next conversations went
deeper into what the software might look like, how it would behave,
and how it might knit into your existing product and software archi‐
tecture. You had these conversations with a close eye on the risky stuff.
You sliced up the stories into the parts that you could build early that
would help you learn more, faster. And because you’re clever, you seg‐
mented your release backlog into stories to take on early to learn, in
the middle to build up, and later to refine.
But now it gets real. It’s time to have our best last conversations.

## Cutting and Polishing

We’d like to get to work building these things, and we know that
building the software that our storytelling describes will go smoothly
and predictably if we can concisely describe exactly what we’d like to
build. But, after all these conversations, the stories we’re left with feel
a little rough around the edges. We likely haven’t talked about any of
them in enough detail to understand precisely what they are and what
they aren’t, and really predict how long they’ll take to build. But we’ve
got a magical machine that’ll fix all this.
I want you to picture an elegantly designed little machine. We’ll drop
jagged, rough stories from our release backlog into a big funnel on the
left side. Then, inside the machine, we’ll hear a little grinding and
clattering. But then out of a little spout on the right side comes small,
polished little nuggets. These little nuggets are the things that team
members can pick up and use to predictably build high-quality
software.
This machine looks magic from the outside. But, on the inside, you
and your team are having some serious rock-cutting and polishing
discussions. The special, secret mechanism hidden inside this machine
is a story workshop.
As you might recall from Chapter 11, story workshops are small, pro‐
ductive conversations where the right people work together to tell the
stories one last time, and in the process make all the tough decisions
about exactly what they’ll choose to build. These are the deep story
conversations that result in confirmation. Finally, we’re getting to that
third C in the card-conversation-confirmation flow. And it’s this C that
helps us really cut and add the polish to these rocks.

## Workshopping Stories

You’ll need a small group that includes a developer, a tester, and people
who understand users and how the UI will look and behave—UI de‐
signers or business analysts in some organizations. This goes best
when the group is small enough to work together effectively in front
of a whiteboard. That’s usually three to five people.
This is a workshop, not in a meeting. Meeting is the word that has
become a euphemism for unproductive collaboration. A story work‐
shop needs to be filled with lots of productive discussion, hand waving,
whiteboard drawing, and sketching. We’ll need to work together to
decide exactly what we’ll build. We’ve got to come out of this conver‐
sation with solid shared understanding, and we’ll need space to have
those productive words-and-pictures conversations.
In all those conversations prior to now, we talked through details, but
hopefully we had the restraint to go just deep enough to make the
decisions we needed to at the time. The decisions we’re making now
focus on answering the question: exactly what will we build?
It’s during this conversation that you’ll find out your story is too big.
By that I mean it’s bigger than the ideal size we like to see going into
development—a couple of days or less to build. OK, it’s not always too
big. But, if you just assume it will be, then you’ll be pleasantly surprised
when it’s not. Happily, you have exactly the right people in the room
to help you break down this story into smaller stories that can be de‐
livered, tested, and demonstrated in the growing product the team is
working together to build.

### [Story Workshop Recipe]

  Use a story workshop to refine understanding and define specifically
  what the development team will build. The workshop is a product
  conversation—supported by lots of pictures and data—that helps the
  team make decisions and arrive at confirmation: the acceptance cri‐
  teria for what we’ll choose to build.
  Ahead of the workshop, let the team know what stories you’ll be work‐
  shopping. Post it on a wall, or otherwise broadcast it. Let team mem‐
  bers opt in; that is, choose to participate or not.
  Keep the workshop small to stay productive. Three to five people is a
  good size.
  Include the right people. For this conversation to be effective, include:
  • Someone who understands users and how the user interface
  could or should work—often a product owner, user experience
  professional, or business analyst
  • One or two developers who understand the codebase you’ll be
  adding the software into, because they’ll best understand what’s
  feasible to build
  • A tester who’ll help test the product—because he’ll help ask the
  tough questions so that we consider the "what abouts" that others
  are often too optimistic to consider
  Other people and roles may be relevant here, but remember that the
  right size for a good conversation is "dinner conversation–sized."
  You may find that one person can wear two hats. For example, I often
  see a combination business analyst-tester in some IT organizations.
  But, if all the concerns aren’t considered, pause the workshop and try
  to find someone from the team who can look after the missing
  concern.
  Dive deep and consider options. Use the conversations to dive deep
  into:
  • Exactly who the user is
  • Exactly how we believe she would use it
  • Exactly what it looks like—that is, the user interface
  • Exactly how the software behaves underneath that user interface
  —those sticky business rules and data validation stuff
  • Roughly how we might build the software—because we need to
  predict how long it will take to build—and happily, we’re making
  things real enough at this point we can more accurately predict
  how long that will take
  Remember that we need not consider anything absolutely required.
  If the discussion leads to solutions that are expensive or complex, step
  back and discuss the problems we’re really solving, and other alter‐
  natives we could build to solve them.
  Agree on what to build. After enough conversation to build shared
  understanding, move to answering the questions:
  • What will we check to confirm this software is done?
  • How will we demonstrate this software later when we review it
  together?
  Talk and doc. Use whiteboards or flipchart paper to draw pictures,
  write examples, and consider options. Don’t let your decisions va‐
  porize. Record them on a whiteboard or flipchart where everyone can
  see. Photograph notes and drawings and then transcribe them later.
  Speak in examples. Wherever possible, use specific examples of what
  users do, exactly what data might be entered, exactly what users would
  see in response, or whatever examples best support your story.
  Split and thin. When discussing details and thinking about develop‐
  ment time, you’ll often find stories are larger than you like to put in
  a development cycle. Work together as a group to split up big stories,
  or "thin" out stories by removing unnecessary extras.
  It’s not working when…
  • No one participates—when one person describes what’s required
  and everyone else listens
  • When we focus only on acceptance criteria and not telling the
  story about who does what and why
  • When we fail to consider options both from a functional and
  technical perspective

## Sprint or Iteration Planning?

Some Agile practitioners accomplish these critical story conversations
during planning sessions like iteration planning or sprint planning.
That works pretty well if you’re working with teams that work effec‐
tively together and come into the discussion with a good understand‐
ing of their product. For teams I worked with for years, that’s the way
we did things.
But one of the biggest complaints I hear from Agile teams is that these
planning meetings are often long, torturous affairs. At some point ev‐
eryone agrees on what to build, even if they don’t have shared under‐
standing, just to make this torturous meeting stop.

### [Coming in from the Cold]

  Nicola Adams and Steve Barrett, RAC Insurance, Perth, Australia
  My first foray into the world of an Agile project team in my role as
  a business analyst was a cold, hard lesson in the power of collabo‐
  ration over the written word.
  — Nicola Adams

  #### The Context

  Recounting a slice of the transformational journey from waterfall to
  Agile within RAC Insurance in Perth, Western Australia, Nicola—an
  experienced BA—was well versed in the traditional delivery approach
  to software development. Her role involved engaging the business,
  understanding the problem domain, and working with IT to docu‐
  ment functional specifications to hand off for delivery. The commu‐
  nication lines were like this:
  The focus had been on detailed specifications to try to leave no stone
  unturned. Recognizing that "developers don’t read," mitigation strate‐
  gies were employed (e.g., specification walkthroughs) with variable
  success. Lengthy time lags were typical from after specifications were
  completed to when the knowledge was needed to support develop‐
  ment and testing

  #### What Happened Initially?

  The natural affinity to written specifications was not easily broken.
  The concept of fitting requirements on the back of a card was hard to
  grasp. How could Nicola expect the developers and testers to deliver
  the required functionality, which she felt accountable for, if they didn’t
  have sufficient information? The focus shifted to creating story nar‐
  ratives, little different from the functional specifications except in
  scale; the lines of communication did not change.
  Nicola’s elaboration session preparations included:
  • Requirements gathering with business stakeholders
  • In-depth analysis of requirements and data
  • Creating story narratives (one to five pages each) documenting
  requirements, solution design, and acceptance criteria
  • Reading the narratives to the team using a projector and asking
  for any questions
  Unfortunately, the outcomes were not so great. The elaboration ses‐
  sions were flat and uninspiring, with the majority of the team disen‐
  gaged. In addition, Nicola felt she had insufficient time to prepare
  stories, and the team largely ignored the narratives during delivery.
  After an elaboration session, Sam, a subject matter expert standing in
  for the product owner, remarked, "If this is an Agile project, I don’t
  want to be involved!"
  This needed fixing!

  #### What Changed?

  Steve, the project manager, facilitated a team retrospective to focus
  on the problem. This retrospective resulted in a number of key take‐
  aways, including abandoning story narrative documents, including
  the business and delivery team in story elaboration, and ensuring a
  set cadence for backlog grooming and story elaboration.
  Nicola went beyond simply applying the actions; she fully embraced
  the intent. The next story elaboration session was a seismic shift from
  what had preceded.
  The team no longer sat bored and disengaged as they plowed through
  screen-projected story narratives. They were now huddled around
  visual models and artifacts, engrossed in real story conversations in‐
  volving the product owner, business subject matter experts, and the
  delivery team.
  The lines of communication had changed. Nicola was no longer the
  intermediary between business and IT; she was now a facilitator al‐
  lowing conversations to flow between those who understood the
  business value, those who sat with the users to know what would be
  usable, and the delivery team who knew what was feasible:
  The business and delivery team loved the new format and were now
  fully engaged, a shared understanding was created around the prob‐
  lems to be solved, group divergence and convergence enabled the
  team to arrive at optimum solutions within constraints, and Nicola
  felt under less pressure and had more time.
  Nicola had come in from the cold!

## Crowds Don’t Collaborate

The torturous sprint planning meeting has become such a common
dysfunction that many teams sensibly choose to have these story dis‐
cussions in the days preceding the meeting. They often have these
scheduled in their calendars as pre-planning meetings, backlog
grooming, or backlog refinement meetings. But, too often, what hap‐
pens is they’ve simply moved the same torture they hated during the
planning meeting to a different day. To add insult to injury, team
members are asked to take a break from their current productive work
to sit through this torture. No wonder they’re not excited about it.
The problem isn’t that story conversations are hard. Well, actually they
can be pretty hard at times. But all conversations are made tougher by
trying to include too many people. If many of those people aren’t in‐
terested or motivated to participate, you’re doomed. You know the
people I’m talking about—the ones pretending we can’t see them play‐
ing with their smartphones under the table.
Allow team members to opt in to these conversations. If later they
complain about the decisions made, make sure you invite them to be
there next time.
If everyone wants to participate, try using a fishbowl collaboration pat‐
tern like the one described in the following sidebar. This way, interested
people can drop by, participate if they want, and leave if they find
they’re not missing anything exciting.

### [Fishbowl Collaboration Pattern]

  If you’ve got people who sincerely want to be involved in the conver‐
  sation, but adding them expands the conversation past a productive
  size, try using a fishbowl collaboration pattern. This’ll give them a
  way to be involved with minimal impact to the outcome. What they
  and others often find is that being there wasn’t as important as they
  thought. Over time you’ll see that they’re happy to let others discuss
  the details and then learn about the results in a later conversation.
  The process works like this: three to five people work together in front
  of whiteboard or flipchart paper—they’re the fish in the bowl.
  Others in the room may observe but not speak. They’re outside the
  bowl.
  If someone from outside the bowl wants to participate, she can "jump
  in." But, when one outsider jumps in, one insider must simultaneously
  jump out.
  In this way, the conversation stays small and productive, and others
  stay informed and involved. It’s also a great way for learners to get up
  to speed without slowing down work.

## Split and Thin

Remember the cake and cupcakes discussion from Chapter 8? Now’s
the time to break down those cakes to the smallest cupcakes you
can. It’s now—when we’ve got developers, testers, and others who can
really build the software—that we can really imagine how we could
break down the story.
Remember that software is "soft." Well, it’s not soft like a sponge or a
cupcake. Ideally, it’s more like a rather large document or a book. If
you were writing a book, like I’m doing my best to do right now, you
wouldn’t try to do it all at one time. You might sit down and write a
chapter at a time. In fact I’ll write a chapter at a time, and Peter, my
competent, supportive editor, will review what I’ve written and make
corrections and suggestions.
But then the chapter’s not "done." Far from it.
I’ll need to go back through and figure out where there should be
illustrations. I’ll need to figure out if I should add footnotes, references,
glossary terms, or index items. Then other editors from the publisher
will go back through each chapter, making final refinements. I’ve nat‐
urally split up the work to do it iteratively so that I can see the whole
book take shape sooner.
You’re reading the "Refine, Define, and Build" chapter. And if you’re
reading it now, it’s hopefully fully baked. If I were to think about my
final acceptance criteria, I’d say it should be:
• Edited and understandable by me
• Edited and understandable by my editors
• Supported by illustrations that help enable readers to visualize
points
• Supported by an index readers could use to find terms in the
chapter
• Supported by a glossary that readers could use to look up defini‐
tions of terms introduced in the chapter
Crap, that’s a lot of work. Even as I type those things into the first draft
now, I realize I’ve got lots of work to do. But I don’t want to do all of
it before moving on to the next chapter, because I’d like to see how the
whole book is hanging together. So I’ll break it into "cupcakes"—small,
complete parts that aren’t ready to ship, but that boost my confidence
that I’m on the right track as I move through this book.
I’d break down my work into stories like this:
• Refine, Define, Build first rough draft
• Refine, Define, Build second refined draft
• Refine, Define, Build with illustrations
• Refine, Define, Build with reviewer feedback incorporated
• Refine, Define, Build index terms
• Refine, Define, Build glossary terms
• Refine, Define, Build final draft
Each one of those things I can tell a story about describes what it looks
like, and thinks through the steps I (with Peter’s editing assistance)
must accomplish to finish each of these smaller versions and improve‐
ments to the chapter. And you can see that as each thing is completed,
the chapter gets progressively more refined and closer to releasable.
In theory, there’s something you could see and consume after the first
story in the list is done. But I wouldn’t do that to you. It wouldn’t be
pretty, and your reactions wouldn’t be good.
Finally, since I know you’re on top of your game, you may have noticed
that the list of smaller, cupcake-sized stories looks a lot like the ac‐
ceptance criteria for the chapter. That’s the magic here. It’s the discus‐
sion of the acceptance criteria that reveals how we could break down
the work into smaller parts we could create and inspect along the way.
It’s important to inspect your work along the way so you can evaluate
it and make course corrections. You should have seen the really stupid
example I’d originally written here. But you’ll never see it because I
wrote it, inspected it, and then removed it.
In a traditional software process, that "inspecting and removing" stuff
would be called bad requirements. But, when you’ve got your Agile
hat on, it’s just learning and iterative improvement.

### [Play Good-Better-Best]

  One of my favorite simple techniques for splitting stories more finally
  is the Good-Better-Best game. We played this game using a big story
  and sticky notes and ended up with this:

  #### Good Enough for Now

  Given a story, start by having a discussion about what’s just good
  enough—barely sufficient, really, and probably not good enough that
  users or customers would love it. Write down characteristics that
  would make it good enough and treat them as separate, smaller
  stories.
  In walking through an example that’s something like IMDb.com (the
  Internet movie database), we discussed the "View movie info" story.
  We imagined a screen where I could look at movie details so that I
  could make a decision about seeing the movie. When we discussed
  Good, we came up with these simple things:
  • View the basic info: title, rating, director, genre, and so on
  • View the movie poster
  • Watch a preview

  #### Better

  Then ask what would make it even better. For the movie database
  example, we ended up with things like:
  • Read a movie synopsis
  • Read member ratings
  • Read reviewer ratings
  • View a list of all the actors in the movie

  #### Best

  Finally, ask what would make it really fabulous. Don’t be afraid to go
  crazy here. Remember, these aren’t the requirements. This is just you
  and your team considering options. Some interesting things some‐
  times come from these discussions—things that might make the
  product really fabulous, but are surprisingly cheap to implement. For
  the movie database example, we ended up with things like:
  • Watch alternative previews or videos about the movie
  • Read trivia about the movie
  • Read news about the movie
  • See and participate in discussions about the movie
  You can see how this progression of smaller stories helps build the
  "View movie info" story up from something that will let me just see
  it work, to stories that would improve it to make it really fabulous. If
  I were building this feature, I’d do the basics first across the whole
  application before I moved on to making things better and then best.
  I just feel safer meeting deadlines when I build that way.

When you’re really having good story discussions, and I know you
will, at the end of a story workshop you should have right-sized stories
supported by lots of extra documentation and models, and by accept‐
ance criteria that describe how you’ll check this story to confirm it’s
done. Sometimes it’ll take a couple of workshops supported by a little
outside research, analysis, and design work to arrive at agreement, but
that’s OK. Cutting and polishing takes time, and a bit more patience.

### [Development Cycle Planning Recipe]

  Agile processes like Extreme Programming and Scrum use timeboxed development, where each development cycle starts with a plan‐
  ning session and ends with review. In many companies, they’re some
  of the most loathed of meetings anywhere. They can be long and
  painful, and by the time team members leave the meeting, they’re
  often ready to agree to anything just to get out of the room. It doesn’t
  take a rocket scientist to guess that the quality of the plans they make
  isn’t so good.
  But it doesn’t need to be that way.
  Here’s a simple recipe that should help you avoid the worst problems.

  #### Prepare
  Choose stories a cycle or two ahead. If you’re a product owner, meet
  routinely with your core product team to discuss the progress of the
  solutions under way. Choose the stories that you’d like to take on next
  to move those solutions closer to release.
  Workshop ahead of time. For those on the product team, make time
  to work together with team members ahead of the planning session.
  Dig into details, split larger stories, and consider multiple options.
  Look back to Mat Cropper’s story in Chapter 7. When I spoke with
  Mat, one of the things he most looked forward to was the series of
  short, half-hour, ad hoc story workshops he had developers and test‐
  ers get ready for planning.
  Invite the whole team, and others whose help you might need during
  the upcoming development cycle.
  
  #### Plan
  
  Start by discussing the big goal for the upcoming cycle. You’ve chosen
  some stories to work in. How does that group of stories help advance
  the solution you’re trying to deliver?
  Review the stories you’ll be discussing. Don’t go into extreme detail
  here—just enough to give everyone the big picture. Look back to
  Nicola and Steve’s story in this chapter. Look at the wall Nicola is
  standing in front of: lots of words and pictures to help team members
  imagine it, right? Isn’t she smart?
  Set a time-box for the delivery team to plan on their own. Remember,
  crowds don’t collaborate. And the people building and testing this
  software need to do some real thinking to create their recipes for
  building these stories—just like Sydnie did in Chapter 10. Give the
  team an hour or so to break into small groups and work together on
  the stories. If you’re a product owner, UI designer, or business analyst,
  stay close by. Observe if you like. But be ready to answer questions
  that’ll help them move fast.
  In small groups, create a plan for each story. Remember the three
  amigos discussed in Chapter 12? Make sure the small groups are like
  that. And, as a development team, decide how many of these stories
  can be successfully completed in the delivery cycle. Don’t forget to
  take into account holidays and days off. I once had a team tell me their
  plan was off because of the upcoming Thanksgiving holiday, as if that
  holiday came out of nowhere and jumped up and surprised them.
  All together, agree on the plan. At the end of the time-box, and after
  the team does their plan for each story, they’ll need to come back and
  share their plan—not every detail, because that would be superboring, even to them. What’s important is for the team to be clear
  about what they believe they can get done in the cycle. They should
  take this plan and their agreement seriously, especially if they want
  others to consider them reliable and predictable.
  Agreeing may take a little time, especially if all the work that needs to
  be done won’t fit in the development time-box. It’s lucky you know
  some tricks for slicing stories down thinner. Try dialing back a story
  from better to just good enough. That should make it fit.
  Celebrate. You’re done. In a past, we liked planning in the afternoon.
  We tried to finish a bit before quitting time. Then we’d celebrate by
  taking the rest of the day off. We showed up the next day refreshed
  and ready to start working on the plan we created together.

## Use Your Story Map During Delivery

Use a map to build shared understanding with your delivery team. I
often hear from team members working in an Agile process how much
they like collaborating, and how productive they feel because every
week or two they see and demonstrate working software. But then they
follow that up with statements like, "I feel like I’ve lost the big picture.
All I see are these little parts of the product we build." Use a map to
give the team the visibility of the whole product or feature you’re
working on. They’ll make better tactical design and development de‐
cisions if they understand the context those decisions fit into.

## Use a Map to Visualize Progress

As you begin to build your product release, the map makes a good
visual dashboard to show what you have and haven’t built.
Some teams remove detailed stories from the body of the map as they
bring them into development to complete. That way, when they look
at the map, all they see is what’s left to build.
Other teams like leaving the map in place and using pens or colored
stickers to mark the stories they’ve completed. When they step back
and look at the map, they see a visualization of what’s done, and what’s
left to do.
Use the map to identify the next stories to build. Every week, product
owners will need-assess the progress of ongoing development work,
and make decisions about what’s important to focus on next. When
the map visualizes progress, then it’s a bit easier to scan it to look for
areas that need more focus. It’s sort of like being a painter. If you can
step back and take in the entire painting, it’s easer to figure out where
to start working next.

## Use Simple Maps During Story Workshops

Each development cycle, you’ll identify stories in the map you should
work on next. You’ll carry those stories into those last best conversa‐
tions you’ll have during story workshops.
An easy visualization to build during that workshop is a simple map.
You might be mapping only the three or four steps the user takes using
a feature you’re discussing. But being able to point to sticky notes on
a wall that show the flow helps the discussion move faster. As you begin
to discuss acceptance criteria, write them on sticky notes and add them
into this mini-map. In the end, you’ll have a simple visualization that
supports the conversation you had in this workshop.

### [Visualize Your Working Backlog]

  Chris Gansen and Jason Kunesh, Obama Campaign Dashboard
  As the Obama 2008 election campaign proved, the Internet has for‐
  ever changed politics. Barack Obama’s online strategy played a direct
  and significant role in his nomination and subsequent election. The
  strategy for the 2012 election was to provide tools that supported
  traditional grassroots organizing and fundraising, while using tech‐
  nology as a "force multiplier" to counteract the massive amounts of
  third-party money entering the race. While we used tools like Pivotal
  Tracker and Basecamp to track the work our teams did to support the
  2012 Obama Campaign Dashboard, to really help everyone else un‐
  derstand what was going on we used walls full of sticky notes. You
  might ask, "Why would you take the time to mess around with a bunch
  of Post-its on the wall?" Here’s why.
  We had two different cultures working together in the same space on
  this effort. We were the folks in the corner who unscrewed the light
  bulbs so we could work in relative darkness; who brought in our own
  noisy keyboards; who wore gigantic headphones to drown out the
  buzz of cable television interviews, bells, and handclaps that perme‐
  ated the open newsroom-style office; and who wore metal band tshirts instead of seersucker suits. All the people who’d worked on
  previous campaigns, the guys in suits, came in with a traditional view
  of software development. "We describe the features we want, and you
  build them for us. Yesterday." They weren’t used to receiving things
  incrementally and seeing them iteratively change and improve, and
  they definitely weren’t used to making the tradeoffs required to get
  the stuff they really needed when it had the biggest impact. It’s a
  campaign. There’s no extending the delivery date, except by act of
  Congress! The day after the election, it’s over whether we’re finished
  or not. And there was no way they’d get everything they imagined.
  When we originally got started, we used some basic mapping ap‐
  proaches to describe the people using our system and the different
  kinds of things they’d need to do. We could then organize the work
  into releases over time. This worked OK, but it was hard for the people
  leading the campaign to really get engaged with thinking about the
  way people would work later, more than a year from the present day.
  Their heads were focused on what they needed to get done now. And
  they were making lots of guesses about what volunteers and group
  leaders would be doing. They had to, especially if we were reimagining
  the way they worked.
  After seven months, we shipped a small, minimum viable product—
  just enough to release to our first users in Iowa. That’s when every‐
  thing changed. The immediate reaction was bad because what we
  released clearly wasn’t everything people envisioned it would be.
  There were lots of important things missing. It had bugs. We heard a
  lot of "Why didn’t you get it right the first time?" As much as we
  assured them we’d be fixing broken things and improving things every
  single week, they couldn’t really buy it until they saw it. But as things
  quickly did improve, that really built trust.
  That’s where the big wall of stickies comes in. We used Pivotal Tracker
  and Basecamp, but all these other people weren’t going to use those
  tools. We needed a fully transparent way that everyone could see what
  we were working on, and what was coming. Our wall of stories was
  organized left to right by calendar week, and top to bottom by priority.
  We were all focused on time. There was a big clock on the wall count‐
  ing down the minutes until the election. They all knew that some
  things were less important now, and some even more critical as elec‐
  tion day got closer. Every story on the wall was color-coded for the
  activity the idea affected—like Field Work, Team Building, Voter
  Registration, and Voter Turnout. There’s a lot of purple in this picture
  because it’s early, and Team Building, represented by the purple stick‐
  ies, is more important than other things like Voter Turnout right now
  When we added things to the board, we did it together with the people
  running the campaign. We talked about what was already planned for
  that week, and what the odds were of it making it into the week’s work.
  We talked about the real problem being solved behind the feature idea.
  Together we decided how important it was relative to all the other
  things on the wall. When it came time to build the software, the de‐
  veloper responsible would work directly with the stakeholder who
  knew the most. They’d work together to figure out the details. Some‐
  times all it took was lots of scribbling on a whiteboard to agree.
  Sometimes we’d take a day and build some simple UI prototypes.
  This big visual wall of sticky notes was critical for building a bridge
  between the people developing the software and the people who
  needed it. It’s what they needed to help them visualize what was going
  on and when, and to actively participate in making decisions.