# Stories Are Actually Like Asteroids

## Introduction

If you’re of a certain age, you may fondly recall playing an early video
game called Asteroids. Stick with me here for a moment. I promise this
is relevant.
In the game Asteroids, you’re represented by a little ship floating deep
in outer space. But you’re stranded in a field of huge asteroids, and you
need to shoot your way out to survive! If you shoot a big asteroid, it
explodes into a few smaller asteroids. And, to make things more com‐
plicated, these smaller asteroids move faster, and in different direc‐
tions—which makes it harder for you to keep from getting hit. If you
shoot one of those smaller asteroids, it’ll break into even smaller as‐
teroids that move even faster in different directions. Pretty soon, the
screen is full of asteroids of all different sizes flying in every possible
direction. Happily, when you shoot the tiniest asteroids, they blow up
completely and help clear away this mess.
A really bad asteroid strategy is to shoot all the big rocks and break
them down into small rocks. The screen fills with lots of small rocks
flying every which way, and you’ll die a quick and painful death.
A really bad product backlog management strategy is to break down
all the big stories so they’re small enough to fit into the next develop‐
ment cycle. Your backlog will fill with lots of small stories flying every
which way, and you’ll die. Well, you won’t actually die, but you’ll be
buried alive in a lot of needless complexity. You and everyone else will
complain about losing the big picture amid all these tiny details.
Break stories down progressively, and just in time.
At each story discussion and splitting stage, you’ll do so with a purpose
in mind:
1. For opportunities you’ll discuss who they’re for, what problems
they solve, and if they’re well aligned with your business strat‐
egy. It may make sense to split bloated opportunities at this point.
2. During discovery, you’ll discuss the specifics of who uses the prod‐
uct, why, and how. Your team’s goal is to envision a product that’s
valuable, usable, and feasible to build. You’ll do lots of rock break‐
ing here. Hopefully you’ll move only the smallest number of sto‐
ries you need forward into a release backlog that describes a min‐
imum viable product release.
3. When planning a development strategy, you’ll discuss where the
risks are—risks that spring from concerns about what users will
like and adopt, and risks that spring from real technical feasibility
concerns. You’ll break rocks with learning in mind, building what
you need to first, to learn the most.
4. When planning for the next development cycle, you’ll have your
last best discussions to decide exactly what to build and make
agreements on how you’ll check the software to confirm it’s com‐
plete. Each one of those agreements provides an opportunity to
break down a story even further where each story satisfies as little
as one agreement.
You can see that if you tried to have all four of these conversations in
the same sitting, it’d be a long, grueling conversation. It’d take a wide
variety of people to weigh in on different aspects. And you’ve probably
gathered from my warnings and your own past experience that big
groups of people don’t work effectively together—at least not all in the
same room at the same time. That’s why we break stories down pro‐
gressively over time with lots of conversations.

## Reassembling Broken Rocks

In the Asteroids game, you have to be very careful about which aste‐
roids you shoot because you can’t put split asteroids back together once
they’re broken. But you can put split stories back together.
To avoid a backlog filled with lots of tiny stories, take a bundle of stories
that go together, and write all their titles on a single card as a bulleted
list. Summarize those titles with a single title on your new card. Voilà,
you’ve got one big story.
This is pretty fantastic stuff when you think about it. The card, and
the title written on it, is a tangible handle to lots of intangible ideas.
Ideas are a lot more malleable than rocks or heavy documents. We
sometimes forget that another name for software development is
knowledge work. When we forget that and instead fixate on docu‐
ments and process, it turns into something dry and secretarial. And
when I work with people managing huge backlogs filled with tiny sto‐
ries, it feels horribly secretarial.

### [Bundle Small Stories to Clean Up Your Backlog]

  I often run into product teams that have backlogs with hundreds of
  items in them. And, predictably, they tell me that they struggle to
  prioritize their backlogs. When I look into their backlogs, they’re
  often filled with lots of little stories. Talking about each one of them
  to make a prioritization decision would take hours, or days in some
  cases. So don’t.
  If this were Asteroids, you’d have lost. But since it’s not, try bundling
  up your small stories into bigger stories:
  1. If your stories are in an electronic backlog, get them out onto
  cards or sticky notes. Whatever tool you’re using should be able
  to print or export to a spreadsheet. I’ll use a simple mail merge
  in a word processing program to create labels for all the stories
  and then stick them to a card, or print directly onto cards.
  2. Ask for help from a group of team members who understand the
  system. Schedule a room with lots of wall or table space where
  you can work.
  3. Give everyone a handful of story cards and ask them to start
  placing them on the tabletop or sticking them to the wall.
  4. When you see a card that seems similar to one you’re placing,
  cluster them together. Don’t think too hard about what "similar"
  means—just go with your gut.
  5. Do this organizing in silence, at least to start. You’ll find that it’s
  the conversation that slows things down. And it’s good to learn
  to use the model and your body language to communicate.
  6. Move and reorganize any card you want. It’s everyone’s model,
  so that means no one owns the position of a card. If something
  looks out of place, move it. If someone disagrees, he or she will
  move it back. That’s your cue to discuss why.
  7. After things settle into clusters, take a different color card or
  sticky and make a header for each cluster. On that card, write a
  better story name—one that distills why all these cards are sim‐
  ilar. If you’ve written a distillation called "UI improvements," that
  may be too vague. "Improve entering and editing comments"
  would be better, assuming those UI changes were about
  comments.
  8. The distillations become your new, bigger stories. The other
  cards become bullet points in its description. Add those
  distillations back into your release backlog. Or, if they’re defer‐
  rable, move them all the way back to your opportunity backlog.
  This works fantastically well for deep backlogs composed of lots of
  little items. It’s wonderful for deep bug lists, too. You know how there
  are always lots of lower-priority bugs that never get fixed? Bundle
  them with other higher-priority bugs in the same area of the system.
  When a developer goes in to fix the high-priority bugs, it’s often trivial
  to hit the low-priority bugs, too. Your customers and users will thank
  you for it.

## Don’t Overdo the Mapping

I often hear from people trying to figure out this story mapping stuff
that it’s just "too much." When I ask them "What went wrong?" they’ll
tell me about creating a very large map of their whole system in order
to discuss a simple feature. They’re right: that’s too much. So don’t do
that.
Map only what you need to tell a story about your feature.
For example, I was working with a company making some changes to
the commenting feature in its collaborative document editing soft‐
ware. The team mapped document editing at a high level, and they
only used a few cards for that. When they got to the area for com‐
menting, they added more cards that summarized what their product
did today using lots of bullets on a single card. Then they began to
discuss changes they’d like to make, adding lots more cards for all the
details and options they were considering.
When adding a feature into an existing product, map a little ahead of
where the feature begins in your users' story, and a little beyond where
it ends. Don’t map your whole product.
Remember that story maps support conversations about your users
and your product ideas. A good rule of thumb is this: if you don’t need
to discuss it, you don’t need to map it.

## Don’t Sweat the Small Stuff

I’ve described this whole rock-breaking journey, and even cautioned
you to treat those rocks like asteroids in the old Atari game so you’re
not tempted to break them down too fast. Hidden within all these
strategies is the assumption that a lot of the stories we come up with
are big. But, actually, a lot of them aren’t. After you deliver a product
or feature to users, you’ll immediately find lots of little things that are
dead obvious—things you wished you’d have thought of before ship‐
ping, but you didn’t. At least that’s what happens to me. For those things
I don’t have an opportunity discussion, or pull together a group to do
product discovery, because it’d be obvious to everyone they should be
done. For those things, I’ll get them into a current release backlog and
then as early as possible workshop them with team members so we
can get them built. The same goes for bugs, and lots of little
improvements.

### [Saving the World, One Little Fix at a Time]

  Here’s my friend Sherif from Atlassian again. He was explaining to
  me that product team members pick up and work on lots of small
  fixes and improvements all the time. They worry about their users a
  lot there. And they know that lots of little bugs and imperfections
  drive their users crazy—and that drives them crazy. They say it’s like
  dying a "death by a thousand paper cuts." So, on the wall near a team
  working on a product called Green Hopper is a bunch of tick marks.
  Every time a team member fixes one of these little things, he or she
  makes a mark on the wall. It looks like 47 of these little fixes will go
  out in the next release. If you use Confluence or JIRA, you can thank
  them later.