# Learn from Everything You Build

## Introduction

If you’ve got a traditional development hat tightly on, you might be‐
lieve you’re done when the software is built. But Agile development
and stories are built for learning. We spend a lot of time before we
build anything making sure we should build it, and agreeing together
on what to build. And, after we build, we’ll look again and ask if should
have built it, and if it’s good enough.
Let’s talk about all the opportunities you have to learn after you build.

## Review as a Team

Let’s rewind to the celebrating part. At the end of a cycle of develop‐
ment and testing, celebration is in order. You’ve turned some ideas,
lots of discussion, sketching, and hand waving into some honest-togoodness working software. It would have taken a lot longer using a
traditional requirements process. And you and your team would likely
feel a lot less ownership of the result.
After a few high-fives, it’s time to sit down as a team and take an hon‐
est look at what we’ve accomplished. If we’re being honest with our‐
selves, we’ll likely find some things we’d change to improve the soft‐
ware. For each of those things, we’ll write another story and add it to
our release backlog. We’ll decide if these are changes we need to make
right away, or changes we can defer 'til later during our endgame.
In processes like Scrum, this is called a sprint review. If you’re a Scrum
practitioner, you may have heard that everyone is welcome at this re‐
view, but I’m going to suggest you do something different.
The team that worked closely together, had those last, best story con‐
versations, agreed on what to build, and worked together to build it
needs time and a safe place to openly discuss their work. What others
outside the team, including business leadership, think of the product
is important and the team needs to hear their opinions. But those
people weren’t in the conversations that built shared understanding
about the details of what to build. They weren’t part of the discussions
that created the detailed plans to build software. And they weren’t
working alongside the team as it turned all these discussions and
agreements into working software. We need to first evaluate if we’ve
built what we envisioned at the quality level we hoped for and in the
timeframe we planned. Do this in a team product review and reflection.

### [Team Product Review and Reflection Recipe]

  The team that worked together to understand the stories—and to
  make a short-term plan for building them—must stop and reflect on
  the quality of their work. Use a short workshop to accomplish this.
  Constrain this workshop to include only the people who worked to‐
  gether to understand and plan the work. Include the product owner
  and any others on the product team, as well as developers, QA, and
  anyone who did active delivery work. Yes, I’m saying that it’s OK to
  exclude business stakeholders. We’ll share with them soon enough.
  But right now we need a safe place to talk.
  Bring food. Years ago in my team, this workshop simply couldn’t start
  if we didn’t have bagels.
  Use this workshop to review three things: the product, the plan, and
  the process.

  #### Product

  Start by discussing the software built as a result of the stories. Make
  sure you bring it up on a screen, and get a chance to try it out. All of
  it. In big teams, it may be the only chance everyone has to see one
  another’s work.
  Grade your quality subjectively as a team. Grading will drive out lots
  of good discussion.
  • Discuss the quality of user experience. Not just how the UI looks,
  but how it feels to use. Is it as good as you expected? Grade your‐
  selves on a scale of 1–5, with 5 being best.
  • Discuss the functional quality. Did testing go smoothly, or were
  there lots of bugs? Do testers expect to find more bugs as more
  software is added, or as they get more time to test? Grade your‐
  selves on a scale of 1–5, with 5 being best.
  • Discuss the code quality. Did you just write code that will be easy
  to maintain and grow? Or did you just write your next batch of
  legacy code? Grade yourselves on a scale of 1–5, with 5 being best.
  Write stories to correct quality issues you see in the product.
  If you’re engaged in both discovery and delivery work, and you should
  be, discuss your discovery work of the last cycle. What did you do?
  What did you learn?

  #### Plan

  If you were working in a time-boxed iteration or a sprint, you started
  by making a plan and a prediction for how much you could get done.
  Was it a good one?
  • Decide which stories are and aren’t done. This may be harder than
  you think. Having this discussion helps your team build a
  common definition of what they consider to be done. Does
  "done" mean there are automated tests? Does it mean that all
  manual testing is done? Does it mean that product owners or UI
  designers have reviewed it?
  • Total the number of stories you agree are done. This is your
  velocity.
  • Total the stories started and not completed. If it’s a lot, it’ll signal
  you need to work on your planning. I call this amount the over‐
  hang. Someone I used to work with called it hangover, because it
  makes your head ache.
  • Discuss the amount of time budgeted on discovery work. Did you
  use the time? Did you use more time than you budgeted? Using
  too little will hurt you later when you don’t have things ready to
  build that you feel confident in. Using too much may hurt your
  chances for delivering what you’ve committed to on time.

  #### Process

  Discuss the way you worked over the last development cycle. Could
  you make changes to the way you’re doing things to improve quality?
  To improve your ability to predictably plan? To just make it more fun
  to be at work every day? Because if you’re having fun, I promise you’ll
  be able to go faster.1
  • Start by discussing changes you tried last cycle. Did they work?
  Do you want to keep them, or kill them?
  • Discuss changes you’d like to try during the next cycle. Don’t take
  on too much. Small changes are best. Trying to change too much
  at once is similar to trying to take on too much work at once.
  You’ll disappoint yourself.
  That’s it. You’ve successfully learned from the stories you’ve built, and
  all the work you’ve done for that matter.

## Review with Others in Your Organization

When the team has given their product a fair evaluation, widen the
audience to include anyone else in the organization that’s interested.
This group will need some insight on the discussions you had as a team
and any tradeoffs you made. Remember, the stories you’ve translated
to working software are likely little rocks chipped off of a larger vision
of the finished product. People outside the team may be expecting to
see that finished product. They’re likely to point out what’s missing
because they weren’t part of the planning sessions where you decided
what to defer until later. Expect that. And help them understand how
the pieces you’ve just built fit into the bigger plan. Do this in a stake‐
holder product review.

### [Stakeholder Product Review Recipe]

  There are lots of others in the organization who are likely interested
  in what you’re working on, and what you’ve accomplished. You’ll need
  to make this work visible to them. Unlike your team, these others
  probably don’t know the details of what you chose to build, nor where
  they fit into the big picture. So, you’ll need to plan on connecting what
  you accomplished and learned back to the product. This is also an
  excellent opportunity to learn from them, and to get their support.
  Invite everyone who’s interested. This is a big public review. Anyone
  interested is welcome. Make sure your whole team is there. Seeing
  others' reactions to what they’ve done, either positive or negative,
  helps remind them that what they’re doing matters.
  Bring food. I promise everyone will like what you have to say when
  they’re loaded up with carbohydrates. Even bad news goes down eas‐
  ier with cookies.
  You’ll review two categories of information: the discovery work
  you’ve been engaged in, and the stories you’ve delivered.

  #### Review Discovery Work

  Reviewing discovery is critical. The best time to get feedback from
  stakeholders is before you’ve invested lots of time building something.
  If you’re showing real lessons learned from putting software in front
  of customers and users, they’ll value learning what their customers
  actually think. The only thing that trumps an executive opinion is a
  cold, hard fact.
  • Discuss each opportunity you’ve taken up briefly: who it’s for,
  why we’re building it, and the outcomes you expect if it’s
  successful.
  • Discuss and show the work you’ve done to understand the prob‐
  lem and the solution.
  • Discuss and show prototypes and experiments you’ve run. Dis‐
  cuss what your customers and users are saying about your
  solution.

  #### Review Delivery Work

  It’s been my experience that stakeholders are focused on what and
  when you’ll release to customers and users. They should be because
  it’s not until after you release a viable solution that you’ll be able to
  observe real outcomes. They’ll be interested in progress made toward
  that goal.
  Review the delivery work you’ve completed at a solution-by-solution
  level. Think of the minimum viable solution as the big rock that’s more
  relevant to stakeholders.
  For each solution:
  • Review the solution’s target customers, users, and outcomes. It’s
  good to remember why we’re building this and what success
  means.
  • Discuss and show the results of stories built for each solution.
  Stakeholders will offer feedback. Hopefully if they had a chance
  to give feedback when you were doing discovery work, the feed‐
  back at this point will be, "Yup, that still looks good."
  • Discuss the stories holistically. If you’re using a strategy like the
  Mona Lisa strategy, you’ll need to explain to them why the soft‐
  ware looks incomplete at this point. Remember that they may
  want to see a square inch of a complete portrait, and not the
  software equivalent of a sketch of the whole canvas.
  • Share with them your progress toward getting this solution re‐
  leasable. How much work is left? What have you learned while
  building the solution that will affect its successful delivery?
  Be prepared to write stories for new opportunities, or for changes
  you’ll need to make.
  It’s possible that others in the room unfamiliar with what you’re
  building and why will suggest things that aren’t a good idea.
  Respectfully. and gently remind them of the target audience and out‐
  come for the solution, and why what they’re suggesting might be a
  great idea, but doesn’t support the outcome you’re currently focused
  on.
  Keep your work visible to everyone in your company. Help them be
  excited about what you’re doing and learning.

## Enough

I’m confident when I use a product I like that I’m not appreciating all
the little details and decisions that went into it. In fact, if it’s working
really well, I hardly notice the product at all. I don’t notice how my
mobile device loses and reestablishes an Internet connection. I don’t
notice how when I change the position of something in the mobile app
of my task management software that the web version seems to be
immediately in sync. But these are important qualities. And I’d notice
if they weren’t there. You as a team have been stewing in lots of details.
But, oddly, you may not want users and others to notice them. In fact,
you may want to notice that they don’t notice them.
You’ll learn the most from the stakeholders in your organization, cus‐
tomers who buy your product, and individual users who’ll use it when
you put enough software in front of them that they can clearly see how
it’ll help them reach one of their goals.
For stakeholders
  Enough software may be the addition of a feature critical to ac‐
  quiring new customers. Or enough may be information on what
  you’ve learned about the details that must be in that feature to be
  competitive.
For customers
  Enough software may be the addition of a feature that will repre‐
  sent real value for them when they or their organization begin to
  use the new software.
For users
  Enough software may be the addition of software that allows them
  to reach one of their goals using your product.
If you did your rock-breaking process well, you ended up with lots of
small, buildable parts. Each of those parts allowed you and your team
to learn something. But, if you were doing it right, those small parts
are likely not enough to be relevant to other groups.
In my mind, I picture this as small bits of software we build piling up
like LEGO bricks. I load all those bricks onto an old-fashioned scale,
the kind with two platforms and a counterweight on one side. What I
weigh this growing pile of software against is a bigger LEGO brick that
represents enough—enough to allow a user to complete a task or reach
a goal; enough for customers to see it as part of their value proposition;
enough for business stakeholders to see how it helps our organization
reach a business goal. When enough software piles up and tips the
scales, it’s time to test that software with users, review it with custom‐
ers, or review it with business stakeholders.
You as a team of close collaborators need to review the results of every
single story to learn and improve not only your product, but also the
way you plan and the way you work together. When getting feedback
and learning from other groups, be sensitive to what is enough for
those groups.

## Learn from Users

We may have been pretty confident that we were building the right
things when we started, but to stay confident it’s important to test the
working software with users.
Notice that I said test here. We don’t learn much from users by playing
"show and tell"—that is, by demonstrating it to them and asking them
to imagine using it and decide if they’d like it. It’s a little like looking
at a new car on a showroom floor and trying to decide if you’d enjoy
driving it. Test-driving your software will help users really evaluate if
it’s solving a problem they have. As a team, we’ll learn more by watch‐
ing them use it. If you and your team were having good story conver‐
sations, you likely talked about users, why they’d value what you were
building, and how they’d use it. It’s watching them use it that really
validates those hypotheses.
When you’ve got enough software to allow users to accomplish some‐
thing meaningful to them, it’s time to test. You may not be testing
something completely new. You may have made changes or enhance‐
ments to something your product already does. Spend time with users
to observe them using your software doing realistic work.

## Learn from Release to Users

You’ve built small amounts of software and reviewed every bit of it as
a team. You’ve periodically reviewed it with stakeholders insider your
organization, and with customers who’ll buy or adopt your product,
and with users who’ll use it. But, if you remember where this book
started, it’s not the software we really wanted—it’s the outcomes we
get after the software is delivered and put into use.
When you feel like you’ve built enough that you’re confident you’ll get
those outcomes, then it’s time to release the software into the world.
I picture one more scale that’s piling up with bricks of software that
I’ve tested with users, iteratively improved, and I’m now confident
could be released. I’ll balance that growing pile against yet another,
larger brick that also represents enough—enough to release and be
successful with its target audience. When I’ve got enough, it’s time to
release.
You’ll need to plan to learn from each release. Please don’t release
software and sit around waiting for your customers and users to com‐
plain. Those complaints are outcomes. But they’re often lagging indi‐
cators of how they really feel and how well your product will really do.
For each release, discuss as a team how you’ll measure or observe the
users of your product to see if you really got the outcomes you ex‐
pected. Discuss and decide how you’ll:
• Build metrics into your product that allow you to track usage of
new features
• Schedule time to observe users as they use the new release
As a team, routinely discuss what you’ve learned, and then take your
ideas for improvement and write more stories. Some you’ll see as im‐
portant enough to implement right away. And others you’ll see as op‐
portunities to add to your opportunity backlog.

## Outcomes on a Schedule

There are some companies and some software that allow us to release
whenever we have enough. But for a great number of companies and
products, if not most of them, we need to release on a schedule. If we’ve
been using our development strategy effectively, we’ve laid down a
foundation in our early opening-game stories, built up the product
using midgame stories, and when it comes time to release, we’re play‐
ing our endgame stories.
Now I need to remind you of a few more truths about software
development.

* Software is never really done. *

You’ll finish implementing the software for each story your team takes
on during a short development cycle. But you likely won’t finish every
story you imagine at the outset of development, or identify as you learn
each cycle. If you’ve used an effective development strategy, however,
the software will be as good as it possibly can be at the time it’s released.

* Outcomes are never insured. *

In spite of all the work you’ve done to validate that you’re building the
right things, people using your product often don’t behave as predic‐
ted. Plan to learn with each release. Plan to make changes based on
what you’ve learned.

* Improvements made after release are the most valuable. *

It’s those unpredictable things that you’ll observe when users begin to
adopt and use your software frequently that yield the most insight. If
you plan for time to really measure and observe outcomes, you’ll be
rewarded with people who really love your product and a product
that’s really valuable for your organization.

## Use a Map to Evaluate Release Readiness

You’ll complete your product release story by story. As you draw near
the date you promised to deliver—and there’s always a promised de‐
livery date—for each major user activity ask, "If we had to ship right
now, what grade would we give ourselves?" If you use letter grades like
my kids get in school, you’ll end up with a report card for your product.
For example, if you looked at a product or feature with five major
activities a few weeks before its promised release date, and saw a report
card of A, A–, B+, D, B+, you might want to take the remaining weeks
and focus on the part in the user’s workflow that’s currently graded a
D. If in the end you release with A s and B s, that’s pretty good. Of
course, straight A s would be better, but getting it out on time may be
more important.
As you draw near the release date of your product, work together to
assess release readiness. I promise you, everyone wants to know.
This book is almost done. If you’ve read this far, you may have some
opinions about its release readiness. You could go back to the table of
contents and write your letter grade on each chapter. Take a smart‐
phone photo and send it to me. I’d love to see it.